This chapter discusses how to account for incomplete ionization in Sentaurus Device.

# Considering Incomplete Ionization

In silicon, with the exception of indium, dopants can be considered to be fully ionized at room temperature because the impurity levels are sufficiently shallow. However, when impurity levels are relatively deep compared to the thermal energy  $kT$ , incomplete ionization must be considered. This is the case for indium acceptors in silicon and nitrogen donors and aluminum acceptors in silicon carbide. In addition, for simulations at reduced temperatures, incomplete ionization must be considered for all dopants. For these situations, Sentaurus Device has an ionization probability model based on activation energy. The ionization (activation) is computed separately for each species present.

All doping species for Sentaurus Device are defined in the datexcodes.txt file. To add new doping species or to modify an existing specification, see Specifying Doping Species on page 11.

# Using the Incomplete Ionization Model

The incomplete ionization model is activated with the keyword IncompleteIonization in the Physics section:

Physics{ IncompleteIonization}

The incomplete ionization model for selected species is activated with the additional keyword Dopants:

Physics{ IncompleteIonization(Dopants = "Species_name1 Species_name2 ...")}

For example, the following command line activates the model only for boron:

Physics{ IncompleteIonization(Dopants = "BoronActiveConcentration")}

The incomplete ionization model can be specified in region or material physics (see Region-Specific and Material-Specific Models on page 18). In this case, the model is activated only in these regions or materials.

# 13: Incomplete Ionization

Using the Incomplete Ionization Model

Using DonorPlusConcentration and AcceptMinusConcentration in the Plot section of the device, you can visualize the ionized donor and acceptor concentrations, respectively.

NOTE Incomplete ionization is implemented in terms of traps and, therefore, is affected by setting the trap occupation explicitly (see Explicit Trap Occupation on page 464). Use named traps to avoid affecting dopant ionization by settings intended for real traps only.

# Incomplete Ionization Model

The concentration of ionized impurity atoms is given by Fermi-Dirac distribution:

$$
N _ {\mathrm {D}} = \frac {N _ {\mathrm {D} , 0}}{1 + g _ {\mathrm {D}} \exp \left(\frac {E _ {\mathrm {F} , n} - E _ {\mathrm {D}}}{k T}\right)} \text {f o r} N _ {\mathrm {D}, 0} <   N _ {\mathrm {D}, \text {c r i t}} \tag {209}
$$

$$
N _ {\mathrm {A}} = \frac {N _ {\mathrm {A} , 0}}{1 + g _ {\mathrm {A}} \exp \left(\frac {E _ {\mathrm {A}} - E _ {\mathrm {F} , p}}{k T}\right)} \text {f o r} N _ {\mathrm {A}, 0} <   N _ {\mathrm {A}, \text {c r i t}} \tag {210}
$$

where  $N_{\mathrm{D,0}}$  and  $N_{\mathrm{A,0}}$  are the substitutional (active) donor and acceptor concentrations,  $g_{\mathrm{D}}$  and  $g_{\mathrm{A}}$  are the degeneracy factors for the impurity levels, and  $E_{\mathrm{D}}$  and  $E_{\mathrm{A}}$  are the donor and acceptor ionization (activation) energies.

In the literature [1], incomplete ionization in SiC material has been considered and another general distribution function has been proposed, which can be expressed as:

$$
N _ {\mathrm {D}} = \frac {N _ {\mathrm {D} , 0}}{1 + G _ {\mathrm {D}} (T) \exp \left(\frac {E _ {\mathrm {F} , n} - E _ {\mathrm {C}}}{k T}\right)} \tag {211}
$$

$$
N _ {\mathrm {A}} = \frac {N _ {\mathrm {A} , 0}}{1 + G _ {\mathrm {A}} (T) \exp \left(- \frac {E _ {\mathrm {F} , p} - E _ {\mathrm {V}}}{k T}\right)} \tag {212}
$$

where  $G_{\mathrm{D}}(T)$  and  $G_{\mathrm{A}}(T)$  are the ionization factors discussed in [2][3]. These factors can be defined by a PMI (see [1] and Example: Matsuura Incomplete Ionization Model on page 1215).

By comparing Eq. 209 and Eq. 210 to Eq. 211 and Eq. 212, it can be seen that, in the case of the Fermi distribution function, the ionization factors can be written as:

$$
G _ {\mathrm {D}} (T) = g _ {\mathrm {D}} \cdot \exp \left(\frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {D}}}{k T}\right), \Delta E _ {\mathrm {D}} = E _ {\mathrm {C}} - E _ {\mathrm {D}} \text {a n d} G _ {\mathrm {A}} (T) = g _ {\mathrm {A}} \cdot \exp \left(\frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {A}}}{k T}\right), \Delta E _ {\mathrm {A}} = E _ {\mathrm {A}} - E _ {\mathrm {V}} \tag {213}
$$

In Sentaurus Device, the basic variables are potential, electron concentration, and hole concentration. Therefore, it is more convenient to rewrite Eq. 209 and Eq. 210 in terms of the carrier concentration instead of the quasi-Fermi levels:

$$
N _ {\mathrm {D}} = \frac {N _ {\mathrm {D} , 0}}{1 + g _ {\mathrm {D}} \frac {n}{n _ {1}}} \text {, w i t h} n _ {1} = N _ {\mathrm {C}} \exp \left(- \frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {D}}}{k T}\right) \text {f o r} N _ {\mathrm {D}, 0} <   N _ {\mathrm {D}, \text {c r i t}} \tag {214}
$$

$$
N _ {\mathrm {A}} = \frac {N _ {\mathrm {A} , 0}}{1 + g _ {\mathrm {A}} \frac {p}{p _ {1}}} \text {, w i t h} p _ {1} = N _ {\mathrm {V}} \exp \left(- \frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {A}}}{k T}\right) \text {f o r} N _ {\mathrm {A}} <   N _ {\mathrm {A}, \text {c r i t}} \tag {215}
$$

The expressions for  $n_1$  and  $p_1$  in these two equations are valid for Boltzmann statistics and without quantization. If Fermi-Dirac statistics or a quantization model (see Chapter 14 on page 285) is used,  $n_1$  and  $p_1$  are multiplied by the coefficients  $\gamma_n$  and  $\gamma_p$  defined in Eq. 47 and Eq. 48, p. 179 (see Fermi Statistics on page 178). For  $N_{\mathrm{D / A}} > N_{\mathrm{D / A,crit}}$ , the dopants are assumed to be completely ionized, in which case, every donor and acceptor species is considered in the Poisson equation. The values of  $N_{\mathrm{D,crit}}$  and  $N_{\mathrm{A,crit}}$  can be adjusted in the parameter file of Sentaurus Device.

The donor and acceptor activation energies are effectively reduced by the total doping in the semiconductor. This effect is accounted for in the expressions:

$$
\Delta E _ {\mathrm {D}} = \Delta E _ {\mathrm {D}, 0} - \alpha_ {\mathrm {D}} \cdot N _ {\mathrm {t o t}} ^ {1 / 3} \tag {216}
$$

$$
\Delta E _ {\mathrm {A}} = \Delta E _ {\mathrm {A}, 0} - \alpha_ {\mathrm {A}} \cdot N _ {\mathrm {t o t}} ^ {1 / 3} \tag {217}
$$

where  $N_{\mathrm{tot}} = N_{\mathrm{A,0}} + N_{\mathrm{D,0}}$  is the total doping concentration. In transient simulations, the terms:

$$
\frac {\partial N _ {\mathrm {D}}}{\partial t} = \sigma_ {\mathrm {D}} v _ {\mathrm {t h}} ^ {n} \left[ \frac {n _ {1}}{g _ {\mathrm {D}}} N _ {\mathrm {D}, 0} - \left(n + \frac {n _ {1}}{g _ {\mathrm {D}}}\right) N _ {\mathrm {D}} \right] \tag {218}
$$

$$
\frac {\partial N _ {\mathrm {A}}}{\partial t} = \sigma_ {\mathrm {A}} v _ {\text {t h}} ^ {p} \left[ \frac {p _ {1}}{g _ {\mathrm {A}}} N _ {\mathrm {A}, 0} - \left(p + \frac {p _ {1}}{g _ {\mathrm {A}}}\right) N _ {\mathrm {A}} \right] \tag {219}
$$

are included in the continuity equations ( $\nu_{\mathrm{th}}^{n,p}$  denote the carrier thermal velocities).

# Physical Model Parameters

The values of the dopant level  $E_{\mathrm{A / D,0}}$ , the doping-dependent shift parameter  $\alpha_{\mathrm{A / D}}$ , the impurity degeneracy factor  $g_{\mathrm{A / D}}$ , and the cross section  $\sigma_{\mathrm{A / D}}$  are accessible in the parameter set Ionization.

For each ionized doping species, the Ionization parameter set must contain a separate subsection where the parameters  $E_{\mathrm{A / D},0}$ ,  $\alpha_{\mathrm{A / D}}$ ,  $g_{\mathrm{A / D}}$ , and  $\sigma_{\mathrm{A / D}}$  are defined. For example, for the dopant BoronConcentration, described in Specifying Doping Species on page 11, for the material SiC, the parameter set is:

```txt
Material  $=$  "SiC" {   
Ionization{ Species("BoronConcentration") { type  $=$  acceptor E_0  $= 0.2$  alpha  $= 3.1\mathrm{e} - 8$  g  $= 4$  Xsec  $= 1.0\mathrm{e} - 12$  }   
}
```

The field type can be omitted because the dopant type is specified in the datexcodes.txt file. It is used here for informative purposes only.

Table 42 Default coefficients for incomplete ionization model for dopants in silicon  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Symbol</td><td rowspan="2">Parameter name</td><td colspan="9">Default value for species *</td><td rowspan="2">Unit</td></tr><tr><td>As</td><td>P</td><td>Sb</td><td>B</td><td>Al</td><td>In</td><td>N</td><td>NDopant</td><td>PDopant</td></tr><tr><td>EA/D,0</td><td>E_*0</td><td>0.054</td><td>0.045</td><td>0.039</td><td>0.045</td><td>0.045</td><td>0.16</td><td>0.045</td><td>0.045</td><td>0.045</td><td>eV</td></tr><tr><td>αA/D</td><td>alpha_*</td><td colspan="9">3.1×10-8</td><td>eVcm</td></tr><tr><td>gA/D</td><td>g_*</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>σA/D</td><td>Xsec_*</td><td colspan="9">1.0×10-12</td><td>cm2</td></tr><tr><td>ND,crit</td><td>NdCrit</td><td colspan="9">1.0×1022</td><td>cm-3</td></tr><tr><td>NA,crit</td><td>NaCrit</td><td colspan="9">1.0×1022</td><td>cm-3</td></tr></table>

# Multiple Lattice Sites

In certain semiconductors, dopants can occupy different lattice sites, resulting in different activation energies for incomplete ionization. An example is 6H-SiC where nitrogen can occupy either a hexagonal site h, or a cubic site  $\mathbf{k}_1$  or  $\mathbf{k}_2$ .

For the most accurate results, the doping concentration at each lattice site must be modeled by a different doping species. This approach works as follows:

- Introduce new doping species in the datexcodes.txt file to describe the doping concentrations in each lattice site (see Specifying Doping Species on page 11).

To model the nitrogen doping in 6H-SiC, you can introduce the following species:

- Nitrogen_h_Concentration  
- Nitrogen_kl_Concentration  
- Nitrogen_k2_Concentration

- Provide a TDR doping file with the concentrations for the new doping species.  
- Provide incomplete ionization model parameters for the new doping species (see Physical Model Parameters on page 282).

In many cases, it is sufficient to specify the average occupation probability of the various lattice sites. For example, you might assume that nitrogen doping in 6H-SiC occupies the hexagonal site h and the cubic sites  $\mathbf{k}_1$  or  $\mathbf{k}_2$  with equal probability.

Sentaurus Device supports this simplification using a Split specification in the command file:

```txt
Physics {
IncompleteIonization (
Split (
Doping = "NitrogenConcentration"
Weights = (0.3333 0.3333 0.3334)
)
)
```

NOTE The sum of the weights must be one.

With a Split specification, it is no longer necessary to introduce new doping species in the datexcodes.txt file. Instead, Sentaurus Device generates the necessary doping species as required and initializes them based on the occupation probabilities. In the example, Sentaurus Device introduces the following doping species automatically:

NitrogenConcentration_split1  
NitrogenActiveConcentration_split1

# 13: Incomplete Ionization

# References

NitrogenPlusConcentration_split1  
NitrogenConcentration_split2  
- NitrogenActiveConcentration_split2  
NitrogenPlusConcentration_split2  
NitrogenConcentration_split3  
NitrogenActiveConcentration_split3  
NitrogenPlusConcentration_split3

NOTE The generated doping species also can be used in a device plot (see Device Plots on page 123).

The corresponding parameters can then be specified in the parameter file as described in Physical Model Parameters on page 282:

```txt
Ionization {
Species ("NitrogenConcentration_split1") {
    E_0 = 0.1
    alpha = 2.5e-8
    g = 2
    Xsec = 1e-12
}
...
```

# References

[1] H. Matsuura, “Influence of Excited States of Deep Acceptors on Hole Concentration in SiC,” in International Conference on Silicon Carbide and Related Materials (ICSCRM), Tsukuba, Japan, pp. 679–682, October 2001.  
[2] P. Y. Yu and M. Cardona, Fundamentals of Semiconductors: Physics and Materials Properties, Berlin: Springer, 2nd ed., 1999.  
[3] K. F. Brennan, The Physics of Semiconductors: With applications to optoelectronic devices, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.