This chapter presents a framework for the simulation of local phase or state transitions.

State transitions appear in device physics in various forms. Typical examples are the charge traps as described in Chapter 17 on page 457. In phase-change memory (PCM) devices, different phases (for example, crystalline and amorphous) of chalcogenides are used to store information and can be modeled with the framework described here. Furthermore, in the hydrogen transport degradation model (see MSC-Hydrogen Transport Degradation Model on page 510), diffusing mobile hydrogen species might be trapped in localized states.

In this chapter, a general modeling framework called multistate configuration (MSC) is presented to describe transitions between phases or states. The framework allows the specification of an arbitrary number of states that interact locally by an arbitrary number of transitions. The states can be charged and carry hydrogen atoms. Transitions between two states might interact with the conduction and valence band, or with hydrogen diffusion equations to preserve charge and the number of hydrogen atoms. The structure of transitions is limited to a linear local dependency between the state occupation rates. However, arbitrary nonlinear local dependency on the solution variables of the transport equations are allowed using PMI models. The state occupation rates are solved self-consistently with the transport model both for stationary and dynamic characteristics.

# Multistate Configurations and Their Dynamic

A multistate configuration (MSC) is defined by the number of states  $N$  and the state occupation probabilities  $s_1, \ldots, s_N$  satisfying the condition:

$$
\sum_ {i} s _ {i} = 1 \tag {523}
$$

For two states  $i$  and  $j$ , an arbitrary number of transitions (described by capture and emission rates) is allowed. The dynamic equation is then given by:

$$
\dot {s} _ {i} = \sum_ {j \neq i} \sum_ {t \in T _ {i j}} c _ {i j} s _ {j} - e _ {i j} s _ {i} \tag {524}
$$

# 18: Phase and State Transitions

Multistate Configurations and Their Dynamic

where  $T_{ij}$  is the set of transitions between  $i$  and  $j$ . For such a transition  $t \in T_{ij}$  with capture and emission rates  $c$  and  $e$ , respectively, you have  $c = c_{ij} = e_{ji}$  and  $e = e_{ij} = c_{ji}$  if  $i$  and  $j$  denote the reference state and interacting state, respectively. The problem can be written in the compact form:

$$
\dot {s} = T s \tag {525}
$$

where  $T$  is the total transition matrix, composed of the individual transition matrices.

Each state can carry a number  $K^Q$  of (positive) charges and a number  $K^H$  of hydrogen atoms (both numbers can be positive or negative, and are zero by default). Transitions between two states must satisfy conservation laws for both quantities. Required particles can be taken from several reservoirs. Reservoir particles are characterized by the corresponding numbers  $K_r^Q$  and  $K_r^H$ , and transitions specify the number  $P_r$  of involved reservoir particles. The conservation laws then read:

$$
K _ {i} - K _ {j} = \sum_ {r} P _ {r} K _ {r} \tag {526}
$$

where  $K_{i}$  and  $K_{j}$  are the characteristic numbers for the reference and interacting states of the transition, respectively. The sum is taken over all reservoirs involved in the transition.

Table 94 lists the available particle reservoirs and their characteristics. The reservoirs of hydrogen atoms, molecules, and ions represent the corresponding mobile species in the hydrogen transport degradation model. Their use is illustrated in Reactions With Multistate Configurations on page 514.

Table 94 MSC particle reservoirs and their characteristics  

<table><tr><td>Description</td><td>Identifying string</td><td>Particle</td><td>Charge KQ</td><td>Hydrogen KH</td><td>Equation</td></tr><tr><td>Conduction band</td><td>CB</td><td>electron</td><td>-1</td><td>0</td><td>Electron</td></tr><tr><td>Valence band</td><td>VB</td><td>hole</td><td>1</td><td>0</td><td>Hole</td></tr><tr><td>Hydrogen atoms</td><td>HydrogenAtom</td><td>H</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>HydrogenAtom</td></tr><tr><td>Hydrogen molecules</td><td>HydrogenMolecule</td><td>H2</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>HydrogenMolecule</td></tr><tr><td>Hydrogen ions</td><td>HydrogenIon</td><td>H+</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>HydrogenIon</td></tr></table>

The resulting space charge and recombination terms with the corresponding equations are taken into account automatically.

# Specifying Multistate Configurations

A multistate configuration is specified by an MSConfig section placed into an MSConfig section of a (region or material or global or interface) Physics section. It is described by its states (at least two) and transitions (each state must be involved in at least one transition) using the keywords State and Transition. An arbitrary number of MSConfig sections is allowed.

```txt
Physics (Region = "si") {  
MSConfigs()  
MSConfig (Name = "ca")  
State (Name = "c") State (Name = "a")  
Transition (Name = "t1")  
To="c" From="a" CEModel("pmi_ce_msc" 0))  
)  
...  
}
```

This example specifies a multistate configuration with two states and one transition between them. See Table 306 on page 1469 for the parameters supported by MSConfig.

State requires a Name as an identifier. The state can carry both a number of positive charges by specifying Charge, and a number of hydrogen atoms by using Hydrogen.

Transition requires several parameters. The keyword CEModel specifies a transition model including its optional model index (see Transition Models on page 487). The reference and interacting states of the transition are selected by the keywords To and From, respectively. A Name specification is mandatory as well.

A transition between differently charge states (correspondingly for hydrogen atoms) requires additional charged particles to preserve the total charge. With Reservoirs, you can specify a list of reservoirs (CB and VB for the conduction band and valence band, respectively), which provides the necessary number of particles specified by Particles as an argument to the reservoir. The conduction band serves as an electron reservoir, and the valence band is a hole reservoir.

# Multistate Configurations on Interfaces

You can also define MSCs on interfaces. Therefore, an MSC might look like the following example:

```txt
Physics (MaterialInterface="Oxide/Silicon") {  
MSConfigs()  
MSConfig()
```

# 18: Phase and State Transitions

Specifying Multistate Configurations

```txt
Name="msc0"  
State(Name="s0" Charge=0 Hydrogen=1)  
State(Name="s1" Charge=1 Hydrogen=0)  
Transition()  
    Name="Depassivation" CEModel("CEModel_PMI",1)  
    To="s1" From="s0"  
    Reservoirs("VB"(Particles=+1) "HydrogenAtom"(Particles=-1))  
    FieldFromInsulator()  
}
```

Observe that, for interface MSCs, the reservoirs refer to bulk reservoirs. At interfaces between the insulator and semiconductor, you can explicitly require that the field from the insulator is selected by using FieldFromInsulator in the MSC specification.

# Additional Remarks

An eNeutral level trap of the form:

```txt
(Name="eN" eNeutral Conc=1.e+13 CBRate=("pmi_ce0" 0) VBRate=("pmi_ce0" 1))
```

can be specified equivalently as an MSC in the following way:

```go
MSConfig (Name="eN" Conc=1.e+13
State (Name="s0" Charge=0) State (Name="s1" Charge=-1)
Transition (Name="tCB" CEModel("pmi_ce0" 0)
	To="s1" From="s0" Reservoirs("CB"(Particles=+1))
	Transition (Name="tVB" CEModel("pmi_ce0" 1)
	To="s0" From="s1" Reservoirs("VB"(Particles=+1))
```

For all multistate configurations, the dynamic is always solved implicitly, that is, no extra equation needs to be specified as an argument to the Coupled or Transient solve statements.

NOTE Only quasistationary and transient simulations support multistate configurations. Small-signal analysis (see Small-Signal AC Analysis on page 97), harmonic balance analysis (see Harmonic Balance on page 101), and noise analysis (see Chapter 23 on page 687) do not support multistate configurations.

The computation of state occupation is influenced by the TrapFilling option of the Set and Unset statements in the Solve section (see Table 189 on page 1376). It is frozen if the trap-filling option Frozen is set; otherwise, the occupation rates are treated as free.

You can release the frozen status again by the Unset(TrapFilling) statement.

The transition dynamic might become numerically unstable, that is, it cannot be solved with sufficient accuracy if, for example, the forward and backward rates of all transitions at one operation point differ by several orders of magnitude. Using -Elimination in MSCfg applies a different solving algorithm, often improving the numeric robustness in such cases.

The state occupation probabilities can be plotted in groups or individually by specifying MSConfig (see Table 327 on page 1486) in the Plot section.

# Transition Models

The MSC framework allows an arbitrary number of transitions between two states of an MSC. Each transition model can be either the model pmi_ce_msc, or a trap capture and emission PMI (see Trap Capture and Emission Rates on page 1190).

# The pmi_ce_msc Model

The pmi_ce_msc transition model supports the following features:

- Arbitrary number of states and transitions  
Charge states  
Several transition rate models (nucleation, growth, electron and hole exchange)  
Equilibrium computation (necessary for detailed balance processes)  
Energy and particle exchange

# States

The states are described by a base energy  $E_{i}$ , a degeneracy factor  $g_{i}$ , the number of negative elementary charges  $K_{i}$  (an arbitrary integer), and the energy  $E_{i}$  of one electron in the state. The inner energy of the state is then:

$$
H _ {i} = E _ {i} + K _ {i} ^ {-} E _ {i} ^ {-} \tag {527}
$$

The electron energy is the sum of the valence band energy and the user-specified value  $E_{i,\text{user}}$ .

# 18: Phase and State Transitions

Transition Models

# Equilibrium

The equilibrium occupation probabilities  $s^*$  are needed to guarantee the detailed balance principle for all transitions. The equilibrium is determined by the state parameters, the temperature, and the Fermi levels of the involved particle reservoirs. You have:

$$
Z _ {i} = g _ {i} \exp \left(- \beta \left(H _ {i} - K _ {i} E _ {\mathrm {F}}\right)\right) \tag {528}
$$

$$
Z = \sum_ {i} Z _ {i} \tag {529}
$$

$$
s _ {i} ^ {*} = Z _ {i} / Z \tag {530}
$$

Here,  $E_{\mathrm{F}}$  is the quasi-Fermi energy and  $\beta$  is the thermodynamic beta. The quasi-Fermi energy is approximated inside the PMI. Let the (approximated) intrinsic density  $n_{\mathrm{I}}$  and the intrinsic Fermi energy  $E_{\mathrm{I}}$  be:

$$
n _ {\mathrm {I}} = \sqrt {N _ {\mathrm {C}} N _ {\mathrm {V}} \exp (- \beta E _ {\mathrm {g}})} \tag {531}
$$

$$
E _ {\mathrm {I}} = \frac {1}{2} \left[ \left(E _ {\mathrm {C}} + E _ {\mathrm {V}}\right) + k T \ln \left(\frac {N _ {\mathrm {V}}}{N _ {\mathrm {C}}}\right) \right] \tag {532}
$$

Then, the carrier quasi-Fermi energies are approximated from the carrier densities by:

$$
E _ {\mathrm {F}, n} = E _ {\mathrm {I}} + k T \ln \left(\frac {n}{n _ {\mathrm {I}}}\right) \tag {533}
$$

$$
E _ {\mathrm {F}, p} = E _ {\mathrm {I}} - k T \ln \left(\frac {p}{n _ {\mathrm {I}}}\right) \tag {534}
$$

and equilibrium Fermi energy then as:

$$
E _ {\mathrm {F}} = \frac {1}{2} \left(E _ {\mathrm {F}, n} + E _ {\mathrm {F}, p}\right) \tag {535}
$$

# Transitions

Several transition models, listed in Table 95, are available and selected by the Formula parameter in the parameter file.

Table 95 The pmi_ce_msc transition models  

<table><tr><td>Description</td><td>Formula</td></tr><tr><td>Arrhenius law</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Nucleation according to Peng</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Growth according to Peng</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Single trap</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>MSC trap</td><td>8</td></tr></table>

In this section,  $i$  denotes the to state, while  $j$  specifies the from state of the transition. For most of the models, only the forward reaction rate (capture) is given, while the backward reaction rate (emission) is computed by:

$$
\frac {e}{c} = \frac {s _ {j} ^ {*}}{s _ {i} ^ {*}} \tag {536}
$$

if not stated otherwise.

# Arrhenius Law (Formula=0)

The forward reaction rate (capture) is given by:

$$
c = r _ {0} \exp (- \beta E _ {\mathrm {a c t}}) \tag {537}
$$

where  $r_0$  is the maximal transition frequency and  $E_{\mathrm{act}}$  is the activation energy.

# Nucleation According to Peng (Formula=1)

A nucleation model, in analogy to the model in [1], [2], and [3], is given by:

$$
c _ {\mathrm {N}} = r _ {0} \exp \left(- \beta \left(E _ {\text {a c t}} + \Delta G ^ {*} (T)\right)\right) \tag {538}
$$

where:

$$
\Delta G ^ {*} (T) = \frac {1 6 \pi}{3} \frac {\gamma_ {\mathrm {S L}} ^ {3}}{\Delta G (T) ^ {2}} \tag {539}
$$

# 18: Phase and State Transitions

Transition Models

$$
\Delta G (T) = \left\{ \begin{array}{l l} \Delta H _ {2} \left[ 1 - \frac {T}{T _ {\mathrm {g}}} \left(1 - \frac {\Delta H _ {1}}{\Delta H _ {2}} \frac {T _ {\mathrm {m}} - T _ {\mathrm {g}}}{T _ {\mathrm {m}}}\right) \right] & \text {i f} \quad T <   T _ {\mathrm {g}} \\ \Delta H _ {1} \frac {T _ {\mathrm {m}} - T}{T _ {\mathrm {m}}} & \text {i f} T _ {\mathrm {g}} <   T <   T _ {\mathrm {m}} \\ 0 & \text {i f} T _ {\mathrm {m}} <   T \end{array} \right. \tag {540}
$$

# Growth According to Peng (Formula=2)

Growing crystalline phases is often described by a growth velocity, for example, in [1]. Some of the growing model has been adopted in the following local model, which reads as:

$$
c _ {\mathrm {G}} = r _ {0} [ 1 - \exp (- \beta \Delta G (T) v _ {\mathrm {M M}}) ] \exp (- \beta E _ {\mathrm {a c t}}) \tag {541}
$$

if  $T < T_{\mathrm{m}}$ ; otherwise, it is zero.

# Single-Trap Transition (Formula=7)

This model depends on the carrier density  $d_{\mathrm{c}}$ . It resembles some standard trap models and is intended to be used in two-state MSCs only. If the number of electrons in the reference state is greater than in the interacting state, that is,  $K_{i} > K_{j}$ , then the capture process depends on the electron density and uses  $d_{\mathrm{c}} = n$ . If  $K_{i} < K_{j}$ , then  $d_{\mathrm{c}} = p$ ; otherwise, you use  $d_{\mathrm{c}} = 0$ . The capture rate is then given by:

$$
c = \sigma v _ {\mathrm {t h}} d _ {\mathrm {c}} \tag {542}
$$

where  $\sigma$  is the cross section and  $\nu_{\mathrm{th}}$  is the thermal velocity. The emission rate for electron capturing is computed as:

$$
e = c \exp \left(\beta \left(E _ {\mathrm {T}} - E _ {\mathrm {F}, n}\right)\right) \tag {543}
$$

where  $E_{\mathrm{T}}$  is the trap energy. For hole-capturing, the emission rate reads as:

$$
e = c \exp \left(\beta \left(E _ {\mathrm {F}, p} - E _ {\mathrm {T}}\right)\right) \tag {544}
$$

# MSC Trap With Emulated Detailed Balance (Formula=8)

The actual model generalizes the single-trapping model (Formula=7) to general MSC states and transitions. The capture rate is computed as in the single trapping case above. The emission rate, however, is computed as follows. Let  $N_{n}$  and  $N_{p}$  be the number of electrons and holes, respectively, which are destroyed during the process. Then, you have:

$$
N _ {n} - N _ {p} = K _ {i} ^ {-} - K _ {j} ^ {-} \tag {545}
$$

and you require:

$$
\frac {e}{c} = g _ {j i} \exp \left(- N _ {n} \beta_ {n} \left(E _ {\mathrm {F}, n} - \overline {{E _ {\mathrm {C}}}}\right) + N _ {p} \beta_ {p} \left(E _ {\mathrm {F}, p} - \overline {{E _ {\mathrm {V}}}}\right) + \beta_ {l} \left(- N _ {n} \overline {{E _ {\mathrm {C}}}} + N _ {p} \overline {{E _ {\mathrm {V}}}} - H _ {j i}\right)\right) \tag {546}
$$

where you used  $g_{ji} = g_j / g_i$  and  $H_{ji} = H_j - H_i$ . The average conduction band and valence band energies are:

$$
\overline {{E _ {\mathrm {C}}}} = E _ {\mathrm {C}} + \frac {3}{2} k T _ {n} \quad \text {a n d} \quad \overline {{E _ {\mathrm {V}}}} = E _ {\mathrm {V}} - \frac {3}{2} k T _ {p} \tag {547}
$$

In thermal equilibrium, the detailed balance principle is satisfied.

# Model Parameters

The model requires parameters for all states and transitions to allow a consistent computation of the thermal equilibrium of the MSC as a whole. Therefore, parameters are grouped into global, state, and transition parameters.

The parameters nb_states and nb_transitions determine the number of states and transitions, respectively, and must be both consistent with the command file specification. The parameter sindex<int> specifies for the <int>-th state a parameter index, which determines a prefix for the state parameters. For example, given sindex0=5, the parameters prefixed with s5_ are read for the 0-th state. A similar parameter index selection is available for transitions using the parameters tindex<int> (for example, tindex2=7 reads the parameters prefixed by t7_.).

For transitions, the specified parameter index must coincide with the model index of the transition in the command file.

Table 96 Global parameters  

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Symbol</td><td>Default</td><td>Unit</td><td>Range</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>plot</td><td>-</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>{0,1}</td><td>Plots some properties to screen</td></tr><tr><td>nb_states</td><td>-</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>&gt;=0, integer</td><td>Number of states</td></tr><tr><td>nb_transitions</td><td>-</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>&gt;=0, integer</td><td>Number of transitions</td></tr><tr><td>sindex&lt;int&gt;</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>&gt;=0, integer</td><td>Parameter index of &lt;int&gt;-th state</td></tr><tr><td>tindex&lt;int&gt;</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>Parameter index of &lt;int&gt;-th transition</td></tr></table>

# 18: Phase and State Transitions

Transition Models

Table 97 Global material and default transition parameters of pmi_ce_msc  

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Symbol</td><td>Default</td><td>Unit</td><td>Range</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>E_g</td><td>E_g</td><td>0.5</td><td>eV</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Band gap</td></tr><tr><td>N_C</td><td>N_C</td><td>1 × 1019</td><td>cm-3</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Electron density-of-states</td></tr><tr><td>N_V</td><td>N_V</td><td>1 × 1019</td><td>cm-3</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Hole density-of-states</td></tr><tr><td>Tm</td><td>Tm</td><td>1 × 10100</td><td>K</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Melting temperature</td></tr><tr><td>Tg</td><td>Tg</td><td>1 × 10100</td><td>K</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Glass temperature</td></tr><tr><td>DeltaH1</td><td>ΔH1</td><td>0.</td><td>J/cm3</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Heat of solid-to-liquid</td></tr><tr><td>DeltaH2</td><td>ΔH2</td><td>0.</td><td>J/cm3</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Heat of amorphous-to-crystalline</td></tr><tr><td>GammaSL</td><td>γSL</td><td>0.</td><td>J/cm2</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Interfacial free-energy density</td></tr><tr><td>MM_volume</td><td>νMM</td><td>0.</td><td>cm3</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Monomer volume</td></tr><tr><td>Reference_E_T</td><td>-</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>{0,1,2}</td><td>Reference energy for ET</td></tr></table>

Table 98 Reference_E_T interpretation  

<table><tr><td>Value</td><td>Symbol</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>ET= (EC+EV)/2 + ET, user</td><td>Midgap</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>ET= EC-ET, user</td><td>Conduction band</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>ET= EV+ET, user</td><td>Valence band</td></tr></table>

Table 99 State parameters  

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Symbol</td><td>Default</td><td>Unit</td><td>Range</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td>Ei</td><td>0.</td><td>eV</td><td>real</td><td>Constant base energy</td></tr><tr><td>g</td><td>gi</td><td>1.</td><td>1</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Degeneracy</td></tr><tr><td>charge</td><td>-Ki</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>integer</td><td>Number of positive elementary charges</td></tr><tr><td>E Charge</td><td>Ei, user</td><td>0.</td><td>eV</td><td>real</td><td>Particle energy with respect to valence band</td></tr><tr><td>E_nb_Tpairs</td><td>-</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>&gt;=0</td><td>Number of interpolation points for base energy</td></tr><tr><td>E_Tp&lt;int&gt;_X</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>K</td><td></td><td>Temperature of &lt;int&gt;-th interpolation point</td></tr><tr><td>E_Tp&lt;int&gt;_Y</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>eV</td><td></td><td>Energy of &lt;int&gt;-th interpolation point</td></tr></table>

Alternatively, the base energy can be described as a piecewise linear (pwl) function of the temperature: With E_nb_Tpairs, you specify the number of interpolation points. For the <int>-th interpolation point  $(0\leq <  \mathrm{int} > <  \mathrm{E\_nb\_Tpairs})$  , you must specify with ETp<int>x the temperature and with ETp<int>_Y, the corresponding energy. The pwl specification is used if E_nb_Tpairs is greater than zero.

Some transition parameters are inherited from the global specification (see Table 97 on page 492). They can be overwritten for specific transitions by using the appropriate parameter prefix. Table 100 lists additional transition parameters.

Table 100 Transition parameters of pmi_ce_msc  

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Symbol</td><td>Default</td><td>Unit</td><td>Range</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>CB_nbParticles</td><td>\(N_{n}\)</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>integer</td><td>Particle number of reservoir CB</td></tr><tr><td>E_T</td><td>\(E_{T, user}\)</td><td>0 .</td><td>eV</td><td>real</td><td>Trap energy</td></tr><tr><td>Eact</td><td>\(E_{act}\)</td><td>0 .</td><td>eV</td><td>real</td><td>Activation energy</td></tr><tr><td>formula</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>Table 95 on page 489</td><td>Model selection</td></tr><tr><td>r0</td><td>\(r_0\)</td><td>1 .</td><td>Hz</td><td>&gt;0 .</td><td>Maximal frequency</td></tr><tr><td>s0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>Parameter index of ‘to’ state</td></tr><tr><td>s1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>Parameter index of ‘from’ state</td></tr><tr><td>sigma</td><td>σ</td><td>\(1 \times 10^{-15}\)</td><td>\(\text{cm}^2\)</td><td>&gt;0</td><td>Cross section</td></tr><tr><td>VB_nb及相关事件</td><td>\(N_{p}\)</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>integer</td><td>Particle number of reservoir VB</td></tr><tr><td>vth</td><td>\(v_{th}\)</td><td>\(1 \times 10^7\)</td><td>cm/s</td><td>&gt;0</td><td>Thermal velocity</td></tr></table>

# Interaction of Multistate Configurations With Transport

Multistate configurations (MSCs) have a direct impact on the transport through their charge density and their recombination rates with selected reservoirs. Furthermore, several physical models can be made explicitly dependent on the occupation probabilities of a specific MSC by using the PMI.

# Apparent Band-Edge Shift

The keywords eBandEdgeShift, hBandEdgeShift, or BandEdgeShift in an MSConfig section switch on band-edge shift models for the conduction band, the valence band, or both, respectively. The model itself is either the MSC-dependent pmi_msc_abes model (see The

# 18: Phase and State Transitions

Interaction of Multistate Configurations With Transport

pmi_msc_abes Model on page 494) or a user-defined PMI_MSC_ApparentBandEdgeShift model as described in Multistate Configuration-Dependent Apparent Band-Edge Shift on page 1137.

The apparent band-edge shifts become visible only if the density gradient transport model is used. To avoid the implicit use of the density gradient quantum correction model, the (electron and hole) gamma parameters in the QuantumPotentialParameters parameter set must be set to zero in the parameter file.

# A typical simulation is:

```txt
Physics {
    MSConfigs (
        MSConfig (
            eBandEdgeShift ("pmi_abes" 0)
            hBandEdgeShift ("pmi_abes" 1)
        )
    eQuantumPotential
    hQuantumPotential
} Solve {
    Coupled {
        Poisson Electron Hole Temperature eQuantumPotential
        hQuantumPotential }
    Transient (...) {
        Coupled {
            Poisson Electron Hole Temperature eQuantumPotential
            hQuantumPotential }
    }
```

Here, the user PMI model pmi_abes has been used for both the conduction and valence bands.

# The pmi_msc_abes Model

The pmi_msc_abes model depends on the lattice temperature  $T$  and, if an MSC is specified, on the state occupation probabilities  $s_i$ , and it reads as:

$$
\Lambda = \sum_ {i} \Lambda_ {i} (T) s _ {i} \tag {548}
$$

where the sum is taken over all MSC states, and  $\Lambda_{i}(T)$  is the apparent band-edge shift (ABES) of state  $i$ .

The model is activated by using (here, for electrons, a MSC named "m0", and a model index 5) as described above:

eBandEdgeShift("pmi_msc_abes"5)

The model uses a two-level or three-level hierarchy (depending on use_mi Pants) to determine the state parameters, namely, the global, the model index, and the state parameters. Table 101 lists the global parameters.

Table 101 Global, model-string, and state parameters of pmi_msc_abes  

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Symbol</td><td>Default</td><td>Unit</td><td>Range</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>plot</td><td>-</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>{0,1}</td><td>Plot parameter to screen</td></tr><tr><td>use_mipars</td><td>-</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>{0,1}</td><td>Use model index for parameter set</td></tr><tr><td>lambda</td><td>Λ</td><td>0.</td><td>eV</td><td>real</td><td>Constant value</td></tr><tr><td>lambda_nb_Tpairs</td><td>-</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>&gt;=0</td><td>Number of interpolation points</td></tr><tr><td>lambda_Tp&lt;int&gt;_X</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>K</td><td>&gt;0.</td><td>Temperature at &lt;int&gt;-th interpolation point</td></tr><tr><td>lambda_Tp&lt;int&gt;_Y</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>eV</td><td>real</td><td>Value at &lt;int&gt;-th interpolation point</td></tr></table>

The names of model index parameters are prefixed with:

```txt
mi<model_index>
```

The state parameters have one of the prefixes depending on the value of use_mipars:

```txt
mi<model_index>_state_name>_state_name>_
```

The lambda_parameters enable either a constant or pwd apparent band-edge shift for each state, which is fully analogous to the specification described in The pmi_msc_heatcapacity Model on page 916.

# Thermal Conductivity, Heat Capacity, and Mobility

The following models allow the dependency on MSC occupation probabilities:

The pmi_msc_thermalconductivity Model on page 928  
The pmi_msc_heatcapacity Model on page 916  
The pmi_msc_mobility Model on page 328

Descriptions of PMIs for MSC-dependent thermal conductivity, heat capacity, and mobility can be found in Multistate Configuration-Dependent Thermal Conductivity on page 1163, Multistate Configuration-Dependent Heat Capacity on page 1170, and Multistate Configuration-Dependent Bulk Mobility on page 1103, respectively.

# Manipulating MSCs During Solve

The MSC dynamic is, in general, solved implicitly. However, sometimes it might be useful to manipulate the computations. For example, you might want to initialize MSCs with nonsteady state solutions or to freeze the dynamic of MSCs because time constants are very large compared to electronic and thermal effects. Furthermore, it might be of interest to disable specific MSC transitions for certain applications (for example, in phase-change memory applications to freeze phases but to allow electronic transitions). The available mechanisms are described here.

# Explicit State Occupations

You can set explicitly the state occupations of MSCs to a spatial-independent and solution-independent value, and freeze and unfreeze the dynamic of the MSCs during solve by using MScfgs in a Set command (see Table 198 on page 1385 for a summary of options).

To set the state occupations of an MSC, you use the MSCConfig command within MSCConfigs, identify the MSC by using its name (and, for mixed-mode simulations, the device name using Device), and specify the occupancies for the involved states using State.

The state occupations are then set collectively and normalized implicitly, while unspecified states default to zero occupation. The Frozen option of MSCfgs applies to all existing MSCs and freezes the state occupations at the set or actual values. To unfreeze the dynamics of the MSCs again, the -Frozen option is used.

The following example illustrates the syntax for single-device simulations:

```powershell
Physics {
    MSConfigs ( ...
        MSConfig ( Name="mscl" State ( Name="s0" ) State ( Name="s1" ) ...
    )
}
Solve {
    Set (
        MSConfigs (
            MSConfig ( Name="mscl"
                State (Name="s0" Value=0.1) State (Name="s1" Value=0.4)
            Frozen   # freeze the MSC dynamic
        )
    ...
    Set ( MSConfigs ( -Frozen ) ) # unfreeze the MSC dynamic
```

Here, the occupancies of states  $\mathsf{s0}$  and  $\mathsf{s1}$  of the MSC  $\mathsf{mscl}$  are set to 0.2 and 0.8, respectively, due to the implicit normalization; all other states are unoccupied.

NOTE Freezing and unfreezing MSCs implies freezing and unfreezing traps, respectively (see the Solve-Set-Traps command in Explicit Trap Occupation on page 464).

# Manipulating Transition Dynamics

You can manipulate the transition dynamic by accessing prefactors for individual transition forward (capture) and backward (emission) reaction rates. This means that the modified rate  $\tilde{c} = \kappa c$  ( $\kappa$  is the prefactor, and  $c$  is the true reaction rate) is used in the dynamic equation. By setting selected transition prefactors to zero, you can decouple states into independent groups. Especially, if you decouple a certain state from all others, the state is frozen, that is, it retains its occupation in the subsequent analysis. With:

Set( (Device="d1" MSConfig="m7" Transition="t3" CPreFactor=0. EPreFactor=0.)

both reaction rates of the specified transition are set to zero (PreFactor can be used for common settings of both reaction rates). Omitting one of the specifying string keywords Device, MSCConfig, and Transition applies the setting to all corresponding objects in the Device-MSCConfig-Transition hierarchy.

NOTE The prefactors affect only subsequent computations, but they do not change the physical parameters of the MSC.

# Example: Two-State Phase-Change Memory Model

Phase-change memory (PCM) devices store a bit as the phase (crystalline or amorphous) of a (chalcogenide) material. Reading information takes advantage of the different conductances of the phases. Storing information requires switching the phases. To switch to the amorphous phase, a high current is passed through the material, heating up the device above the melting point. When switching off the current, the molten material cools so rapidly that it cannot crystallize, but remains in a metastable amorphous phase. To switch to the crystalline phase, the material is reheated more gently. The material remains solid, but the temperature is sufficient that the phase can relax to the equilibrium crystalline phase.

# 18: Phase and State Transitions

# References

The PCM device is modeled by a two-state model representing the crystalline and amorphous phase using an MSC with two uncharged states. The transition is modeled by the Arrhenius law formula (Formula=0) of the pmi_ce_msc transition model. The model has four parameters:

The base energies and the degeneracy factors of the states determine the equilibrium.  
The activation energy  $E_{\mathrm{act}}$  and  $r_0$  of the transition determine the velocity of the transition.

A short interpretation is given:

Let  $s = s_{\mathrm{c}}$  denote the degree of crystallization of the material and  $s_{\mathrm{a}} = 1 - s$ , the amorphization rate. Assuming an energy difference  $\delta E > 0$  between the amorphous and crystalline phases, and that the amorphous phase has  $g > 1$  times more microscopic realizations than the crystalline state, in equilibrium  $s = 1 / [g\exp (-\delta E / kT) + 1]$ , that is, the amorphous state is preferred at higher temperatures. The critical temperature where the equilibrium occupation rates  $s_{\mathrm{c}}$  and  $s_{\mathrm{a}}$  are equal is  $T_{\mathrm{crit}} = \delta E / k\ln (g)$ .

The dynamic is given by crystallization and amorphization rates  $r_{\mathrm{c}} = r_{0}\exp (-E_{\mathrm{act}} / kT)$  and  $r_{\mathrm{a}} = r_0g\exp (-(E_{\mathrm{act}} + \delta E) / kT)$ , respectively, assuming a simple Arrhenius law for the crystallization rate. Here,  $r_0$  is the maximal crystallization rate, and  $E_{\mathrm{act}}$  is the activation energy.

# References

[1] C. Peng, L. Cheng, and M. Mansuripur, “Experimental and theoretical investigations of laser-induced crystallization and amorphization in phase-change optical recording media,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 82, no. 9, pp. 4183–4191, 1997.  
[2] S. Senkader and C. D. Wright, "Models for phase-change of  $\mathrm{Ge}_2\mathrm{Sb}_2\mathrm{Te}_5$  in optical and electrical memory devices," Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 504-511, 2004.  
[3] D.-H. Kim et al., "Three-dimensional simulation model of switching dynamics in phase change random access memory cells," Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 101, p. 064512, March 2007.