This chapter describes the organic models available in Sentaurus Device.

The electrical conduction process in organic materials is different from crystal lattice semiconductors. However, similar concepts in semiconductor transport theory can be used in treating the conduction process in organic materials.

# Introduction to Organic Device Simulation

An organic material or semiconductor is formed from molecule chains, and the primary transport of carriers (electrons and holes) is through a hopping process. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels in organic materials are analogous to the conduction and valence bands, respectively. In addition, excitons need to be considered since these bound electron-hole pairs contribute to the distribution of electron and hole populations. Traps are also central to organic transport, and these need to be taken into account appropriately.

Therefore, a combination of semiconductor models and organic physics models is required to model reasonably the physical transport processes of organic devices within the framework of Sentaurus Device. The models needed in a typical organic device simulation are:

- The Poole-Frenkel mobility model is used to model the hopping transport of the carriers (electrons and holes). This model is dependent on electric field and temperature. Note that it is common for electrons to have two orders of magnitude higher mobility than holes (see Poole-Frenkel Mobility (Organic Material Mobility) on page 386).  
- Organic-organic heterointerface physics requires special treatment for the ballistic transport of carriers and bulk excitons across heterointerfaces with energy barriers (see Gaussian Transport Across Organic Heterointerfaces on page 780).  
- Gaussian density-of-states (DOS) approximates the effective DOS for electrons and holes in disordered organic materials and semiconductors (see Gaussian Density-of-States for Organic Semiconductors on page 266).  
- The traps model must be initialized with the appropriate capture cross sections and densities (see Chapter 17 on page 457).  
- The Langevin bimolecular recombination model is used to model the recombination process of carriers and the generation process of singlet excitons (see Bimolecular Recombination Model on page 451).

# 20: Organic Devices

References

- A singlet exciton equation is introduced to model the diffusion process, the generation from bimolecular recombination, the loss from decay, and the optical emissions of singlet excitons. Note that only Frenkel excitons (electron-hole pairs existing on the same molecule) participate in the optical process in organic materials (see Singlet Exciton Equation on page 237).

The organic device simulator is based on the work of Kozlowski [1], and other useful papers are available [2]–[10].

Many acronyms are used to describe organic device layers and transport mechanisms (see Table 108).

Table 108 Commonly used acronyms for organic transport  

<table><tr><td>Acronym</td><td>Definition</td></tr><tr><td>EBL</td><td>Electron blocking layer</td></tr><tr><td>EML</td><td>Emission layer</td></tr><tr><td>ETL</td><td>Electron transport layer</td></tr><tr><td>HOMO</td><td>Highest occupied molecular orbital</td></tr><tr><td>HTL</td><td>Hole transport layer</td></tr><tr><td>LUMO</td><td>Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital</td></tr><tr><td>SCL</td><td>Space charge limited</td></tr><tr><td>TCL</td><td>Trapped charge limited</td></tr><tr><td>TSL</td><td>Thermally stimulated luminescence</td></tr></table>

# References

[1] F. Kozlowski, Numerical simulation and optimisation of organic light emitting diodes and photovoltaic cells, Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany, 2005.  
[2] S.-H. Chang et al., "Numerical simulation of optical and electronic properties for multilayer organic light-emitting diodes and its application in engineering education," in Proceedings of SPIE, Light-Emitting Diodes: Research, Manufacturing, and Applications X, vol. 6134, pp. 26-1-26-10, 2006.  
[3] P. E. Burrows et al., “Relationship between electroluminescence and current transport in organic heterojunction light-emitting devices,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 79, no. 10, pp. 7991–8006, 1996.

[4] M. Hoffmann and Z. G. Soos, "Optical absorption spectra of the Holstein molecular crystal for weak and intermediate electronic coupling," Physical Review B, vol. 66, no. 2, p. 024305, 2002.  
[5] J. Staudigel et al., “A quantitative numerical model of multilayer vapor-deposited organic light emitting diodes,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 86, no. 7, pp. 3895–3910, 1999.  
[6] E. Tutiš et al., “Numerical model for organic light-emitting diodes,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 430–439, 2001.  
[7] B. Ruhstaller et al., "Simulating Electronic and Optical Processes in Multilayer Organic Light-Emitting Devices," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 723-731, 2003.  
[8] B. Ruhstaller et al., “Transient and steady-state behavior of space charges in multilayer organic light-emitting diodes,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 89, no. 8, pp. 4575–4586, 2001.  
[9] A. B. Walker, A. Kambili, and S. J. Martin, "Electrical transport modelling in organic electroluminescent devices," Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 14, no. 42, pp. 9825-9876, 2002.  
[10] S. Odermatt, N. Ketter, and B. Witzigmann, “Luminescence and absorption analysis of undoped organic materials,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 90, p. 221107, May 2007.

# 20: Organic Devices

References