This chapter discusses noise analysis, fluctuation analysis, and sensitivity analysis in Sentaurus Device.

This chapter explains the Sentaurus Device features to model noise, statistical fluctuations of doping, trap concentration, workfunction, band edge, geometry, dielectric constant, metal conductivity, and sensitivity to variations of model parameters, doping, and geometry. All these topics deal with the response of the device characteristics to small, device-internal variations. For noise, these variations occur randomly over time within a single device; for statistical fluctuations, the variations are random device-to-device variations; and for sensitivity, the variations are user supplied. Despite the different nature of the variations, they all can be handled by the same linearization approach called the impedance field method and, therefore, Sentaurus Device treats them all in a common framework.

Using the Impedance Field Method explains how to perform noise, fluctuation, and sensitivity analysis. Noise Sources on page 692 discusses the noise and random fluctuation models that Sentaurus Device offers. Statistical Impedance Field Method on page 703 describes a modeling approach for random dopant fluctuations, trap concentration fluctuations, geometric variations, and workfunction variations based on statistical sampling. Deterministic Variations on page 715 discusses user-supplied variations of doping, geometry, and model parameters.

Impedance Field Method on page 721 discusses the background of the method [1], and Noise Output Data on page 722 summarizes the data available for visualization.

# Using the Impedance Field Method

Sentaurus Device treats noise analysis, fluctuation analysis, and sensitivity analysis by the impedance field method, and as extensions of small-signal analysis (see Small-Signal AC Analysis on page 97).

NOTE The impedance field method is not supported with the HeteroInterface option (see Abrupt and Graded Heterojunctions on page 10), the Thermionic option (see Thermionic Emission Current on page 777), or dipole layers (Dipole Layer on page 176).

For noise and random fluctuations, Sentaurus Device computes the variances and correlation coefficients for the voltages at selected circuit nodes, assuming the net current to these nodes is fixed. As the computation is performed in frequency space, the computed quantities are

called the noise voltage spectral densities. Sentaurus Device also computes the variances and correlation coefficients of the currents through the nodes, assuming fixed voltages; these quantities are the noise current spectral densities.

For the statistical impedance field method (sIFM) and for deterministic variations, Sentaurus Device computes responses of node voltages assuming fixed currents and responses of node currents assuming fixed voltages.

# Specifying Variations

To use noise and random fluctuation analysis, specify the physical models for the microscopic origin of the deviations (called the local noise sources, LNS) as options to the keyword Noise in the Physics section of the command file of Sentaurus Device:

```txt
Physics {
...
Noise <string> (<Noisemodels>)
```

where  $<\text{NoiseModels}>$  is a list that specifies any number of noise models listed in Table 308 on page 1470. The name given by the string after Noise is optional. Using Noise specifications with different names allows you to investigate different specifications of noise in a single simulation run.

For the sIFM, specify RandomizedVariation in the global Math section and in a device-specific global Physics section:

```txt
Math {
    RandomizedVariation <string> ( <specification>
    ...
}
Device <string> {
    Physics {
        RandomizedVariation <string> ( <specification>
    }
}
```

where <specification> specifies the details for the randomization (see Statistical Impedance Field Method on page 703).

For deterministic variations, specify the variations as options to DeterministicVariation in the global Physics section:

```txt
Physics {
DeterministicVariation( <variations> )
```

where  $\langle \text{variations} \rangle$  is a list that specifies any number of deterministic variations (see Deterministic Variations on page 715 and Table 279 on page 1455).

# Specifying the Solver

In any case, use the ObservationNode option to the ACCoupled statement to specify the device nodes for which the noise spectral densities or deviations are required, for example:

```txt
ACCoupled (  
StartFrequency = 1.e8 EndFrequency = 1.e11  
NumberOfPoints = 7 Decade  
Node (n_source n_drain n_gate)  
Exclude (v_drain v_gate)  
ObservationNode (n_drain n_gate)  
ACExtract = "mos"  
NoisePlot = "mos"  
}  
poisson electron hole contact circuit
```

The keyword ObservationNode enables noise and fluctuation analysis (in this case, for the nodes n_drain and n_gate). NoisePlot specifies a file name prefix for device-specific plots (see Noise Output Data on page 722). For more information on the ACCoupled statement, see Small-Signal AC Analysis on page 97.

NOTE The observation nodes must be a subset of the nodes specified in Node  $(\dots)$ .

# Analysis at Frequency Zero

You can perform variation analysis at frequency zero. If you specify in the ACCoupled statement the single frequency zero by:

StartFrequency  $= 0$  . EndFrequency  $= 0$  . NumberOfPoints  $= 1$

this mode is enabled, which enhances both speed and memory consumption of the analysis, compared to the analysis at positive frequency. However, you must be aware of the following: First, capacitances of AC nodes cannot be extracted and are set to zero in the output files. Second, for general structures, only the current Green's functions (and their responses) are well defined and computed. The voltage Green's functions and their related responses cannot be computed. Therefore, their computation is disabled by default and corresponding output data is set to zero. However, if all parts of the structure are conductively (and not only capacitively) coupled, voltage responses are well defined and their computation can be enabled explicitly by specifying VoltageGreenFunctions as a parameter in the ACCoupled statement.

# Output of Results

The results of the analysis are the noise voltage spectral densities, the noise current spectral densities, and voltage and current deviations. They appear in the ACExtract file (see Table 129) and, in the case of the sIFM, in a separate .csv file. The units are  $\mathrm{V}^2\mathrm{s}$  for the voltage spectral densities and  $\mathrm{A}^2\mathrm{s}$  for the current noise spectral densities. If the string specified after Noise is not empty, it is prefixed to the name of the spectral density in the ACExtract file.

Table 129 Noise and fluctuation data written into ACExtract file  

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>S_V</td><td>Autocorrelation noise voltage spectral density (NVSD)</td></tr><tr><td>S_I</td><td>Autocorrelation noise current spectral density (NISD)</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_ee
S_V_hh</td><td>Electron NVSD
Hole NVSD</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_eeDiff
S_V_hhDiff</td><td>Electron NVSD due to diffusion LNS
Hole NVSD due to diffusion LNS</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_eeMonoGR
S_V_hhMonoGR</td><td>Electron NVSD due to monopolar GR LNS
Hole NVSD due to monopolar GR LNS</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_eeFlickerGR
S_V_hhFlickerGR</td><td>Electron NVSD due to flicker GR LNS
Hole NVSD due to flicker GR LNS</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_BandEdge
S_I_BandEdge</td><td>NVSD and NISD due to band edge fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_Conductivity
S_I_Conductivity</td><td>NVSD and NISD due to metal conductivity fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_Doping
S_I_Doping</td><td>NVSD and NISD due to random dopant fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_Epsilon
S_I_Epsilon</td><td>NVSD and NISD due to dielectric constant variations</td></tr></table>

Table 129 Noise and fluctuation data written into ACExtract file (Continued)  

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>S_V_Geometric</td><td>NVSD and NISD due to geometric fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>S_I_Geometric</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>S_V_TrapConcentration</td><td>NVSD and NISD due to trap concentration fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>S_I_TrapConcentration</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>S_V_Trap</td><td>NVSD and NISD due to trapping noise</td></tr><tr><td>S_I_Trap</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>S_V_Workfunction</td><td>NVSD and NISD due to workfunction fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>S_I_Workfunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of the cross correlation noise voltage spectral density (NVXVSD)</td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of the cross correlation noise current spectral density</td></tr><tr><td>ImS_IXI</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_ee</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of the electron/hole NVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_ee</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_hh</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_hh</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_eeDiff</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of the electron/hole NVXVSD due to diffusion LNS</td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_eeDiff</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_hhDiff</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_hhDiff</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_eeMonoGR</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of the electron/hole NVXVSD due to monopolar GR LNS</td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_eeMonoGR</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_hhMonoGR</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_hhMonoGR</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_eeFlickerGR</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of the electron/hole NVXVSD due to flicker GR LNS</td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_eeFlickerGR</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_hhFlickerGR</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_hhFlickerGR</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_BandEdge</td><td>Real part of the NVXVSD and NIXISD due to band edge fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI_BandEdge</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_Conductivity</td><td>Real part of the NVXVSD and NIXISD due to metal conductivity fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI_Conductivity</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_Doping</td><td>Real part of the NVXVSD and NIXISD due to random dopant fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI_Doping</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_Epsilon</td><td>Real part of the NVXVSD and NIXISD due to dielectric constant fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI_Epsilon</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_Geometric</td><td>Real part of the NVXVSD and NIXISD due to geometric fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI_Geometric</td><td></td></tr></table>

Table 129 Noise and fluctuation data written into ACExtract file (Continued)  

<table><tr><td>Name</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_TrapConcentration</td><td rowspan="2">Real part of the NVXVSD and NIXISD due to trap concentration fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI_TrapConcentration</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_Trap</td><td rowspan="4">Real/imaginary parts of the NVXVSD and NIXISD due to trapping noise</td></tr><tr><td>ImS_VXV_Trap</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI_Trap</td></tr><tr><td>ImS_IXI_Trap</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_VXV_Workfunction</td><td rowspan="2">Real parts of the NVXVSD and NIXISD due to workfunction fluctuations</td></tr><tr><td>ReS_IXI_Workfunction</td></tr><tr><td>dV</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Voltage deviation due to deterministic variation</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>dI</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Current deviation due to deterministic variation</td><td></td></tr></table>

# Noise Sources

# NOTE

Noise scales differently with the device width compared to currents or voltages. For all noise sources noted in this section, for 2D devices, the device width is assumed to be given by AreaFactor. Therefore, it is not necessary to perform a full 3D simulation to obtain the correct scaling behavior for an essentially 2D structure. For 3D structures, when simulating only half (or a quarter) of the structure, you can use AreaFactor=2 (or AreaFactor=4) to obtain the correct scale for the full structure, provided that spatial correlations of the noise sources can be neglected.

# Common Options

All noise sources discussed in this section can be specified with the parameters SpaceMid, SpaceSig, and SpatialShape. These parameters can restrict the noise source to a window. The possible values, the default values, and the modifier function specified by these keywords are described in Energetic and Spatial Distribution of Traps on page 458. The modifier function is applied to each of the two coordinates on which a noise source depends. For noise sources without spatial correlation, this means that the square of the modifier function is multiplied by the noise source.

For example, the following unnamed Noise section activates random dopant fluctuations globally:

Noise (Doping)

The following Noise section named window activates random dopant fluctuations in a cube of  $20~\mathrm{nm}$  side length, centered at the origin:

```txt
Noise "window" (Doping (SpaceMid = (0 0 0) SpaceSig = (0.01 0.01 0.01) SpatialShape = Uniform
```

# Diffusion Noise

The diffusion noise source (keyword DiffusionNoise) available in Sentaurus Device reads:

$$
K _ {n, n} ^ {\text {D i f f}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}, \omega\right) = 4 q n \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right) k T _ {\mathrm {n}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right) \mu_ {n} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right) \delta \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1} - \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) \tag {741}
$$

A corresponding expression is used for holes.  $K_{n,n}^{\mathrm{Diff}}$  is a diagonal tensor.

$T_{\mathrm{n}}$  is either the lattice or carrier temperature, depending on the specification in the command file:

DiffusionNoise（<temp_option>）

where <temp_option> is LatticeTemperature, eTemperature, hTemperature, or e_h_Temperature. The default is LatticeTemperature.

For example, if the following command is specified:

```txt
Physics {
Noise (DiffusionNoise (eTemperature))
}
```

Sentaurus Device uses the electron temperature for the electron noise source and the lattice temperature for the hole noise source. The keyword e_h_Temperature forces the corresponding carrier temperature to be used for the diffusion noise source for each carrier type.

# Equivalent Monopolar Generation-Recombination Noise

An equivalent monopolar generation-recombination (GR) noise source model (keyword MonopolarGRNoise) for a two-level, GR process can be expressed as a tensor [2]:

$$
K _ {n, n} ^ {\mathrm {G R}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}, \omega\right) = \frac {\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {J} _ {n} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right) \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {J} _ {n} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right)}{n} \cdot \frac {4 \alpha \tau_ {\mathrm {e q}}}{1 + \omega^ {2} \tau_ {\mathrm {e q}} ^ {2}} \delta \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1} - \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) \tag {742}
$$

where  $\alpha$  is a fitting parameter and  $\tau_{\mathrm{eq}}$  an equivalent GR lifetime. The parameters  $\tau_{\mathrm{eq}}$  and  $\alpha$  can be modified in the parameter file of Sentaurus Device. A similar expression is used for holes.

NOTE This model does not use the actual generation-recombination models activated in the simulation. Therefore, it cannot be considered a physical model for recombination noise.

# Bulk Flicker Noise

The flicker generation-recombination (GR) noise model (keyword FlickerGRNoise) for electrons (similar for holes) is:

$$
K _ {n, n} ^ {\mathrm {f G R}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}, \omega\right) = \frac {\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {J} _ {n} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right) \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {J} _ {n} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right)}{n \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right)} \frac {2 \alpha_ {\mathrm {H}}}{\pi \mathrm {v l n} \left(\tau_ {1} / \tau_ {0}\right)} [ \operatorname {a t a n} (\omega \tau_ {1}) - \operatorname {a t a n} (\omega \tau_ {0}) ] \delta \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1} - \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) \tag {743}
$$

where  $\alpha_{\mathrm{H}}$  is a fit parameter;  $\omega = 2\pi \nu$ , the angular frequency; and the time constants fulfill  $\tau_0 < \tau_1$ . The parameters  $\alpha_{\mathrm{H}}, \tau_0$ , and  $\tau_{1}$  for electrons and holes are accessible in the parameter file. With increasing frequency, the noise source changes from constant to  $1 / \nu$  behavior close to the frequency  $\nu_{1} = 1 / \tau_{1}$  and, ultimately, to  $1 / \nu^{2}$  behavior at  $\nu_{0} = 1 / \tau_{0}$ .

NOTE This model does not use the actual generation-recombination and trap models activated in the simulation. Therefore, it cannot be considered a physical model for flicker noise.

# Trapping Noise

The Traps option to Noise activates a trapping noise model that follows the microscopic model in [3]. The trapping noise sources are determined fully by the trap model and, therefore, do not require additional adjustable parameters. For example:

Physics { Noise(Traps) }

activates trapping noise for all traps is the device. It is not possible to activate trapping noise for selected traps only. All trap models apart from tunneling to electrodes are supported. For more details on traps, see Chapter 17 on page 457.

Consider a trap level  $k$  with concentration  $N_{\mathrm{t},k}$  and trap electron occupation  $f_{k}$ . Trapping noise is expressed by adding a Langevin source  $s_{i,k}$  to the net electron capture rate for each process  $i$ :

$$
R _ {i, k} = N _ {\mathrm {t}, k} \left(1 - f _ {k}\right) c _ {i, k} - N _ {\mathrm {t}, k} f _ {k} e _ {i, k} + s _ {i, k} \tag {744}
$$

where  $c_{i,k}$  is the electron capture rate for a trap occupied by zero electrons, and  $e_{i,k}$  is the electron emission rate for a trap occupied by one electron (see also Eq. 507, p. 467). Denoting the expectation value with  $\langle \rangle$ , the trapping noise source takes the form:

$$
K _ {i j, k} ^ {\text {t r a p}} (\omega) = 2 q ^ {2} \int d t \left\langle s _ {i, k} (0) s _ {j, k} (t) \right\rangle \exp (- \mathrm {i} \omega t) = 2 q ^ {2} \delta_ {i j} N _ {\mathrm {t}, k} \left[ \left(1 - f _ {k}\right) c _ {i, k} + f _ {k} e _ {i, k} \right] \tag {745}
$$

That is, different capture or emission processes are independent, and the noise source for a given process is twice the total trapping rate (the sum of the capture and emission rates). The model also assumes that different trap distributions are independent, so that their noise contributions add.

# Random Dopant Fluctuations

The noise sources for random dopant fluctuations are activated by the Doping keyword. The noise source for acceptor fluctuations reads:

$$
K _ {\mathrm {A}} ^ {\mathrm {R D F}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}, \omega\right) = N _ {\mathrm {A}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right) \frac {\Theta (0 . 5 \mathrm {H z} - | \mathrm {v} |)}{1 \mathrm {H z}} \delta \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1} - \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) \tag {746}
$$

Here,  $\nu = \omega / 2\pi$  is the frequency. An analogous expression holds for the noise source for donors,  $K_{\mathrm{D}}^{\mathrm{RDF}}$ . Physically, the noise sources are static. However, to avoid a  $\delta$ -function in frequency space, Sentaurus Device spreads the spectral density of the noise source over a  $1\mathrm{Hz}$  frequency interval. Eq. 746 is based on the assumption that individual dopant atoms are completely uncorrelated.

Acceptors and donors are considered to be independent. Their contributions to the noise spectral densities add. By default, both acceptor and donor concentrations are assumed to fluctuate. Using either the option Type=Acceptor or Type=Donor of Doping, the fluctuation can be restricted to acceptors or donors, respectively. For example:

```txt
Physics {
    Noise "acceptor" (Doping(Type=Acceptor))
    Noise "donor" (Doping(Type=Donor))
```

# 23: Noise, Fluctuations, and Sensitivity

Noise Sources

declares two named Noise sections that allow you to examine the impact of the fluctuation of acceptors and donors separately.

By default, Sentaurus Device neglects the impact of the random dopant fluctuations on mobility and bandgap narrowing. To take their impact into account, specify the Mobility and BandgapNarrowing options to the Doping keyword. For example:

Physics { Noise( Doping(Mobility) ）}

activates the random dopant fluctuation noise source, taking into account the impact of the fluctuations on mobility.

NOTE It is strongly advisable to use either both the BandgapNarrowing and Mobility options or neither option. Otherwise, inconsistencies can arise when the mobility depends indirectly on bandgap narrowing. Even when this dependency is weak, the inconsistency can lead to large errors in IFM results.

# Random Geometric Fluctuations

The geometric fluctuation model accounts for random displacements of electrodes on insulator, as well as metal-insulator, insulator-insulator, and semiconductor-insulator interfaces. The noise source reads:

$$
K ^ {\mathrm {g e o}} \left(\stackrel {\triangledown} {r _ {1}}, \stackrel {\triangledown} {r _ {2}}, \omega\right) = \frac {\Theta (0 . 5 \mathrm {H z} - | \mathrm {v} |)}{1 \mathrm {H z}} \left\langle \delta s \left(\stackrel {\triangledown} {r _ {1}}\right) \delta s \left(\stackrel {\triangledown} {r _ {2}}\right) \right\rangle \tag {747}
$$

where  $\nu = \omega / 2\pi$  is the frequency, and the correlation of the displacements  $\delta s$  is given by:

$$
\langle \delta s (\vec {r} _ {1}) \delta s (\vec {r} _ {2}) \rangle = \hat {n} (\vec {r} _ {1}) \cdot \hat {n} (\vec {r} _ {2}) [ a _ {\mathrm {i s o}} (\vec {r} _ {1}) + | \vec {a} (\vec {r} _ {1}) \cdot \hat {n} (\vec {r} _ {1}) | ] [ a _ {\mathrm {i s o}} (\vec {r} _ {2}) + | \vec {a} (\vec {r} _ {2}) \cdot \hat {n} (\vec {r} _ {2}) | ] \exp \left[ - \frac {(\vec {r} _ {1} - \vec {r} _ {2}) ^ {2}}{\lambda^ {2}} \right] \tag {748}
$$

# where:

$\vec{r}_1$  and  $\vec{r}_2$  are positions on the interface.  
-  $\hat{n}(\vec{r})$  is the local interface normal in point  $\vec{r}$ .  
-  $a_{\mathrm{iso}}$  (the isotropic correlation amplitude),  $\hat{a}$  (the vectorial correlation amplitude), and  $\lambda$  (the correlation length) are adjustable parameters.

The correlation has the following noteworthy properties:

Displacements of interface positions occur only in the interface normal direction.  
The displacement amplitude depends on the interface direction when  $\hat{a}$  is nonzero.

Displacements are spatially correlated; the correlations decay with increasing distance.  
- Correlations depend on the relative normal direction. Perpendicular interfaces are uncorrelated; opposing interfaces are negatively correlated (so the actual shifts are positively correlated).

The impact of displacements is accounted for in the variation of the dielectric constant in the Poisson equation, in the variation of the space charge in the Poisson equation, and in the variation of the band-edge profile in the continuity and density gradient equations. The impact through other quantities, such as tunneling rates, is currently neglected.

To use geometric fluctuations, in the global Math section for a device, specify one or more surfaces. Each surface has a name and is the union of an arbitrary number of interfaces and electrodes. The following example specifies a surface S2 that consists of all the poly-oxide interfaces in the device and the channel/gateoxide region interface:

```txt
Device "MOS" {
    Math {
        Surface "S2" (
            RegionInterface="channel/gateoxide"
            MaterialInterface="PolySi/Oxide"
        }
    ...
}
```

The order in which regions or materials in the specification of interfaces are named determines the sense of interface displacements: The positive direction points from the region or material named first into the region or material named second.

The surfaces are then used to activate the noise sources. The following example activates geometric fluctuations for surfaces S1 and S2:

```txt
Physics {
Noise(
    GeometricFluctuations "S1"
    GeometricFluctuations "S2"
) ...
} ...
} ...
```

Points on the same surface are correlated according to Eq. 748. Points on different surfaces are uncorrelated. The contributions of different surfaces to the noise spectral densities add.

The parameters  $a_{\mathrm{iso}}$ ,  $\hat{a}$ , and  $\lambda$  are specified as the parameters Amplitude_Iso, Amplitude and lambda in a surface-specific GeometricFluctuations parameter set. All three parameters are given in micrometers, and default to zero.  $\lambda$  must be set to positive value. For example:

```awk
GeometricFluctuations "S1" { lambda  $=$  5e-3 Amplitude  $=$  (9e-4, 3e-4, 0) Amplitude_Iso  $=$  1e-4 }
```

NOTE For 3D structures, the mesh spacing on the fluctuating interfaces must be small compared to the correlation length  $\lambda$  to be able to resolve the Gaussian in Eq. 748. For 2D structures, the mesh does not need to resolve the Gaussian.

The GeometricFluctuations keyword supports options, which are specified as follows:

```txt
GeometricFluctuations "S1" ( Options  $= < 0..1>$  \* default 0 WeightQuantumPotential  $=$  float> \* default 0.5 WeightDielectric  $=$  float> \* default 0
```

When you specify geometric variations for a semiconductor-insulator interface, you can specify whether the variation should be applied to both sides of the interface (Options=0) or only to the semiconductor side (Options=1).

For example, in a MOSFET, if you want to change the thickness of the semiconductor body, but not the thickness of the gate insulator, you can use Options  $= 0$  and include in the Surface specification both the (bottom) semiconductor-gate insulator interface and the (top) gate insulator-contact or poly interface, such that the movements of the top and bottom gate insulator interfaces leave the gate insulator thickness unaltered. Alternatively, you can use Option  $= 1$  and include in the surface specification only the (bottom) semiconductor-gate insulator interface. Physically, both options are nearly equivalent; however, the latter can sometimes be numerically more accurate.

The values given with WeightQuantumPotential and WeightDielectric interpolate between two different approximations for the variation terms that arise from the density-gradient quantum correction and the dielectric constant. Calibrating these two parameters can improve the accuracy of geometric variation results. Doing so is usually only worthwhile when computing insulator position variations, while keeping the insulator thickness fixed.

# Random Trap Concentration Fluctuations

Trap concentration variations are activated by the TrapConcentration option to Noise. For each trap level, Sentaurus Device uses a noise source of the form:

$$
K _ {i i} ^ {\text {t r a p c o n c}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}, \omega\right) = N _ {i} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right) \frac {\Theta (0 . 5 \mathrm {H z} - | \mathrm {v} |)}{1 \mathrm {H z}} \delta \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1} - \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) \tag {749}
$$

Here,  $N_{i}$  is the concentration for the trap level  $i$ .

All trap levels are assumed to be mutually independent. Their contributions to the noise spectral densities add.

The trap concentration fluctuation model accounts for the impact of the trap concentration on the space charge in the Poisson equation and on the trap-related generation-recombination rates in the continuity equations.

# Random Workfunction Fluctuations

The random workfunction fluctuations describe the impact of the fluctuation of the workfunction at contacts on insulators and at metal-insulator interfaces. The noise source reads:

$$
K ^ {\text {w o r k f u n c t i o n}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, v\right) = \frac {\Theta (0 . 5 \mathrm {H z} - | v |)}{1 \mathrm {H z}} a \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}\right) a \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) \exp \left[ - \frac {\left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1} - \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) ^ {2}}{\lambda^ {2}} \right] \tag {750}
$$

where:

$\nu = \omega /2\pi$  is the frequency.  
$a$  is the workfunction standard deviation.  
$\lambda$  is the correlation length.

NOTE The spatial correlation in Eq. 750 differs from the one created by the randomization procedure used for the sIFM-based approach (see Workfunction Variations on page 709).

Workfunction fluctuations are activated by the WorkfunctionFluctuations option to Noise. This option must be followed by a string that denotes the name of a surface that consists exclusively of contacts on insulators and metal-insulator interfaces. For example:

```hcl
Device "MOS" {
    Math {
        Surface "S3" (
            Electrode = "gate"
        }
    Surface "S3" (  electrode = "gate"
```

# 23: Noise, Fluctuations, and Sensitivity

# Noise Sources

```txt
MaterialInterface  $=$  "Nitride/Aluminum"   
}   
Physics{ Noise(WorkfunctionFluctuations "S3") ...   
}...   
}...
```

The definition of surfaces is described in Random Geometric Fluctuations on page 696. Any number of WorkfunctionFluctuations (with different names) can be specified. They are considered to be uncorrelated, and their contributions to the noise spectral densities add.

The parameters  $a$  and  $\lambda$  are specified by Amplitude (in eV) and lambda (in  $\mu \mathrm{m}$ ) in a surface-specific WorkfunctionFluctuations parameter set, for example:

```txt
WorkfunctionFluctuations "S3" { lambda  $= 0.01$  Amplitude  $= 0.4$
```

# Random Band Edge Fluctuations

Random band edge fluctuations describe the effect of the variation of the electron affinity  $\delta \chi$  and the band gap  $\delta E_{\mathrm{g,tot}} = \alpha \delta \chi + \delta E_{\mathrm{g}}$ , where  $\alpha$  is a user-specified parameter, and  $\delta \chi$  and  $\delta E_{\mathrm{g}}$  are statistically independent ( $\langle \delta \chi(\vec{r}_1) \delta E_g(\vec{r}_2) \rangle = 0$ ) fields with Gaussian correlations. Therefore, noise sources for conduction band and valence band variations are:

$$
K ^ {E _ {\mathrm {C}}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, v\right) = \frac {\Theta (0 . 5 \mathrm {H z} - | v |)}{1 \mathrm {H z}} a _ {\chi} ^ {2} \exp \left[ - \frac {\left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1} - \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) ^ {2}}{\lambda^ {2}} \right] \tag {751}
$$

$$
K ^ {E _ {\mathrm {V}}} \left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1}, \mathrm {v}\right) = \frac {\Theta (0 . 5 \mathrm {H z} - | \mathrm {v} |)}{1 \mathrm {H z}} \left[ (1 + \alpha) ^ {2} a _ {\chi} ^ {2} + a _ {E _ {\mathrm {g}}} ^ {2} \right] \exp \left[ - \frac {\left(\stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {1} - \stackrel {\rightharpoonup} {r} _ {2}\right) ^ {2}}{\lambda^ {2}} \right] \tag {752}
$$

For  $a_{E_g} = 0$ , some interesting limiting cases exist:

For  $\alpha = 0$ , the conduction band and valence band vary in the same direction with the same amplitude.  
For  $\alpha = -1$ , the valence band does not vary at all.  
For  $\alpha = -2$ , the conduction band and the valence band vary in opposite directions.

Band edge fluctuations are activated by the option BandEdgeFluctuations to Noise:

```txt
Physics {
Noise(BandEdgeFluctuations <string>)
```

Here, the string identifies a volume specification that determines where, in the device, band edge fluctuations are active. Named volumes are specified in the device global Math section by providing lists of regions and materials that belong to the volume:

```txt
Math {
    Volume <string> (
        Regions = (<string>...)
        Materials = (<string>...)
    )
}
```

The dimensionless parameter  $\alpha$ , the correlation length  $\lambda$  ( $\mu$ m), and the amplitudes  $a_{\chi}$  and  $a_{E_{\mathrm{g}}}$  are specified as Chi2Eg, Lambda, Amplitude_Chi, and Amplitude_Eg in a named global parameter set BandEdgeFluctuations:

```hcl
BandEdgeFluctuations <string> {
Amplitude_Chi = <float>
Amplitude_Eg = <float>
Chi2Eg = <float>
Lambda = <float>
}
```

The string is the name with which the band edge fluctuations are activated as a Noise option in the device global Physics section.

# Random Metal Conductivity Fluctuations

Metal conductivity fluctuations are activated by the option ConductivityFluctuations to Noise:

```txt
Physics {
Noise(ConductivityFluctuations <string>)
```

Here, <string> identifies a named volume specification that determines where, in the device, metal conductivity fluctuations are active. For the specification of named volumes, see Random Band Edge Fluctuations on page 700.

Metal conductivity fluctuations are assumed to have Gaussian spatial correlations. Parameters for metal conductivity fluctuations are specified in the named global Conductivity Fluctuations parameter set in the parameter file:

```txt
ConductivityFluctuations <string> { Amplitude  $=$  <float> \* amplitude in A/cmV Lambda= <float> \* correlation length in um }
```

The string is the name with which the metal conductivity fluctuations are activated as a Noise option in the device global Physics section.

# Random Dielectric Constant Fluctuations

Random dielectric constant fluctuations are activated by the option EpsilonFluctuations to Noise:

```twig
Physics{ Noise(EpsilonFluctuations string>）   
}
```

Here, <string> identifies a named volume specification that determines where, in the device, dielectric constant fluctuations are active. For the specification of named volumes, see Random Band Edge Fluctuations on page 700. Random dielectric constant fluctuations are assumed to have Gaussian spatial correlations.

Parameters for random dielectric constant fluctuations are specified in the named global EpsilonFluctuations parameter set in the parameter file:

```txt
EpsilonFluctuations <string> { Amplitude  $=$  <float> \* amplitude, dimensionless Lambda= <float> \* correlation length in um }
```

The string is the name with which the dielectric constant fluctuations are activated as a Noise option in the device global Physics section.

# Noise From SPICE Circuit Elements

To take into account the noise generated by SPICE circuit elements (see Compact Models User Guide, Chapter 1 on page 1), specify the CircuitNoise option to ACCoupled. The form of the noise source for a particular circuit element is defined by the respective compact model.

Due to a restriction of the SPICE noise models, SPICE circuit elements contribute only to the autocorrelation noise. For cross-correlation noise, Sentaurus Device considers SPICE circuit elements as noiseless. Non-SPICE compact circuit elements do not implement noise at all and, therefore, Sentaurus Device always treats them as noiseless.

# Statistical Impedance Field Method

The statistical impedance field method (sIFM) can be applied to doping concentration, trap concentration, semiconductor-insulator and insulator-insulator interface positions, and the workfunction at contacts on insulators and metal-insulator interfaces. It creates a large number of randomized variations of the quantities under investigation (dopant concentrations, trap concentrations, or workfunction) and computes the modification of the device characteristics in linear response.

The sIFM is specified in the global Math section:

```txt
Math {
    RandomizedVariation <string> (
        NumberOfSamples = <int>
            Randomize = <int>
                ExtrudeTo3D
                RandomField()
            )
        ...
    ...
}
```

Any number of RandomizedVariation specifications can be present, each of which specifies the sample size and the random seed for one set of variations. The sets are distinguished by the optional string after the RandomizedVariation keyword.

NumberOfSamples determines the number of variations in a set. Randomize determines the seed for the random number generator. For a value of zero (the default), the seed value is selected automatically and differently in each simulation run. A negative value disables the sIFM, and a positive value is directly taken as the seed for the random number generator. The last possibility allows to reproduce results for different simulation runs of the same device, on the same platform, and the same release of Sentaurus Device.

For 2D structures, the keyword ExtrudeTo3D instructs Sentaurus Device to perform randomization for a 3D structure that is obtained by extruding the 2D structure to a width given by the AreaFactor. This is necessary to correctly model variations with spatial correlations, but it will increase runtime for these variations. By default, randomization is performed in two dimensions, which corresponds to variations that are perfectly correlated in the third spatial direction. ExtrudeTo3D has no effect on 3D structures.

RandomField allows you to specify the statistical properties of the spatial correlations for this RandomizedVariation specification (see Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705).

The quantities to be randomized are specified in a device-global Physics section:

```txt
Device <string> {
Physics {
RandomizedVariation <string> (<specifications>)
```

The string after RandomizedVariation in the Physics section is matched with the one after RandomizedVariation in the global Math section, and <specifications> is described along with the individual variations in the following sections.

For one ACCoupled statement, for each RandomizedVariation specification, the sIFM creates two files per ObservationNode: one for voltage and one for current variation at the node. The file names are derived from the base name given by ACExtract, the string after the RandomizedVariation keyword, the name of the type of variation (current or voltage), the node name, and the extension .csv. The file contains comma separated values (CSV), a very simple format that can be imported by many applications (for example, spreadsheet programs).

The first line contains the column headings, using double-quoted strings. Each subsequent line corresponds to one bias point and one frequency.

The first couple of columns contain the data specified in the ACPlot statement. They serve to connect each line to a bias point. The rest of the columns within each line correspond to the current or voltage shift for one particular randomized profile. For all lines, the same column always corresponds to the same profile. For frequencies larger than  $0.5\mathrm{Hz}$ , the shifts are zero.

# Options Common to sIFM Variations

All variations supported by sIFM provide the keywords SpatialShape, SpaceMid, and SpaceSig. They allow you to multiply the variation by a space-dependent factor, and they work in the same way as for traps (see Energetic and Spatial Distribution of Traps on page 458). The shape functions must adequately be resolved by the mesh. The following example activates random doping variations, which are damped with a Gaussian function on a length scale of  $10\mathrm{nm}$  around the origin:

```txt
Physics {
RandomizedVariation "rnd" (Doping(SpatialShape = Gaussian, SpaceMid = {0 0 0})
```

```txt
SpaceSig  $=$  (0.01 0.01 0.01)   
）   
}
```

Using SpatialShape=Uniform instead of SpatialShape=Gaussian would switch off the doping variation completely for points outside a cube of  $20\mathrm{nm}$  side length centered at the origin.

By default, SpatialShape is Uniform, and SpaceSig is a vector with very large components. Therefore, by default, the space-dependent factor is one everywhere. If the mesh has dimension  $d$ , only the  $d$  first components of SpaceMid and SpaceSig are significant; additional components are ignored.

# Spatial Correlations and Random Fields

Several variations supported by sIFM are spatially correlated. You can specify the statistical properties of the correlation either directly in the specification of the variation or by declaring RandomField in the RandomizedVariation section in the global Math section. If the statistical properties are specified directly in the specification of the variation, the variation is statistically independent from all other variations. In contrast, if RandomField is declared, all variations in the same RandomizedVariation section are correlated, and direct specifications are ignored.

Random fields are declared like this:

```typescript
Math {
RandomizedVariation <string> (
    RandomField(
        CorrelationFunction = Grain | Exponential | Gaussian
        AverageGrainSize = <vector>
            Lambda = <vector>
                Resolution = <vector>
                    MaxInternalPoints = <int>
            )
        ...
    )
}
```

The spatial domain covered by a random field is obtained automatically from the spatial domains in which the variations that use it are active. A random field can have more than one component. The number of components in the random field is the largest number required by any of the variations that refer to the random field. Only band edge variations require two components; the other variations require only one component. The components are numbered

# 23: Noise, Fluctuations, and Sensitivity

# Statistical Impedance Field Method

starting from zero. Variations with only one component always use the zero-th component of the random field.

CorrelationFunction determines the way in which spatial correlations are modeled.

If CorrelationFunction=Grain (default), first, grains are generated randomly. The creation of grains works as described in Metal Workfunction Randomization on page 245. If AverageGrainSize is the vector  $(\lambda_x, \lambda_y, \lambda_z)$ , the vertex at coordinate  $(x, y, z)$  belongs to the grain with the center  $(x_0, y_0, z_0)$  for which  $(x - x_0)^2 / \lambda_x^2 + (y - y_0)^2 / \lambda_y^2 + (z - z_0)^2 / \lambda_z^2$  becomes smallest.

For each grain and for each component of the random field, a random number  $g$  in the range from 0 to 1 is selected, with uniform probability and statistically independent from the random number for other grains or other components. For variations that use a list of discrete values for the variation,  $g$  is mapped into this list according to the variation-specific probability for the values in the list. If  $g$  is close to zero, the first value in the list will be taken. If  $g$  is close to 1, the last value in the list will be taken. For variations with continuous values,  $g$  will be mapped by a monotonically increasing function to the probability distribution for the variation.

If CorrelationFunction is Exponential or Gaussian, a Fourier approach is used to create fields  $g(\vec{r})$  of exponentially correlated or Gaussian correlated, dimensionless random numbers. The fields for different components of the random field are uncorrelated.

The correlation length is given (in  $\mu$ m) by the components  $(\lambda_x,\lambda_y,\lambda_z)$  of Lambda:

$$
\langle g (x, y, z) g \left(x _ {0}, y _ {0}, z _ {0}\right) \rangle = \exp \left(- \sqrt {\left(x - x _ {0}\right) ^ {2} / \lambda_ {x} ^ {2} + \left(y - y _ {0}\right) ^ {2} / \lambda_ {y} ^ {2} + \left(z - z _ {0}\right) ^ {2} / \lambda_ {z} ^ {2}}\right) \tag {753}
$$

$$
\langle g (x, y, z) g \left(x _ {0}, y _ {0}, z _ {0}\right) \rangle = \exp \left(- \left(x - x _ {0}\right) ^ {2} / \lambda_ {x} ^ {2} - \left(y - y _ {0}\right) ^ {2} / \lambda_ {y} ^ {2} - \left(z - z _ {0}\right) ^ {2} / \lambda_ {z} ^ {2}\right) \tag {754}
$$

The physical variation is obtained by multiplying  $g(\mathring{r})$  by a variation-specific amplitude.

For Gaussian and exponential correlations, Resolution (one to three dimensionless positive components; default  $(0.25 0.25 0.25)$ ) can be used to specify how accurately spatial correlations should be resolved, for each spatial axis. The components specify this accuracy in units of Lambda. One possible application for Resolution is to use a large value for one axis to pretend that the domain is nearly flat along this direction, which reduces the dimension of the Fourier transform and can give a substantial speedup.

For Gaussian and exponential correlations, MaxInternalPoints specifies the maximum number of internal points used to compute the randomization. The default value is a very large integer. If the number of internal points used to compute the randomization exceeds the value set with MaxInternalPoints, Sentaurus Device terminates. The purpose of this is to avoid excessive computation time, which scales superlinearly with the number of internal points.

To reduce the number of internal points, restrict the randomized domain, or increase Lambda or Resolution.

You can specify Lambda and AverageGrainSize as vectors with less than three components. In this case, the missing components are assumed equal to the last given component.

All options that are available in the RandomField section are also available as options to the specification of all variations with spatial correlation, with the same meaning of keywords.

The specification of variations with spatial correlation supports a string, which allows you to put several such variations into the same RandomizedVariation section. Their contribution is added. For example:

```txt
Physics {
    RandomizedVariation "rv" (Geometric "g1" (...) Geometric "g2" (...) )
```

# Doping Variations

Doping variations are enabled using the Doping keyword:

```typescript
Physics {
    RandomizedVariation <string> (
        Doping (
            Type = Doping | Acceptor | Donor
            SpatialShape = Uniform | Gaussian
            SpaceMid = <vector>
            SpaceSig = <vector>
            -Mobility
            -BandgapNarrowing
        )
    )
}
```

For RandomizedVariation specifications in the Math section for which no RandomizedVariation specification of the same name is present in the Physics section, dopant variations are enabled automatically.

Type determines which dopants to randomize. For Acceptor, only acceptors are randomized. For Donor, only donors are randomized. For Doping (default), both are randomized.

For the options of Doping, see Options Common to sIFM Variations on page 704.

Acceptor and donor concentrations are randomized independently, assuming dopants are spatially uncorrelated and using a Poisson distribution function. This means that for a vertex  $i$  of the mesh with a box volume  $V_{i}$  and an average doping concentration  $N_{i}$ , the probability to find exactly  $k$  dopants in the box for vertex  $i$  is:

$$
P _ {i} (k) = \frac {\left(N _ {i} V _ {i}\right) ^ {k}}{k !} \exp \left(- N _ {i} V _ {i}\right) \tag {755}
$$

The volume  $V_{i}$  is a 3D volume. If the simulated structure is 2D, the AreaFactor is taken into account to compute  $V_{i}$ . Eq. 755 is consistent with the assumptions that are used to obtain Eq. 746, p. 695.

The sIFM accounts for the impact of dopant concentration on space charge, mobility, and bandgap narrowing. The options -Mobility and -BandgapNarrowing disable the impact due to mobility and bandgap narrowing, respectively.

NOTE It is strongly advisable to use either both the -BandgapNarrowing and -Mobility options or neither option. Otherwise, inconsistencies can arise when the mobility depends indirectly on bandgap narrowing. Even when this dependency is weak, the inconsistency can lead to large errors in IFM results.

When the keyword RandomizedDoping appears in a device-specific Plot section, all randomized acceptor and donor profiles are written to the Plot file. The individual profiles are identified by a number in their name. This number is the same one that appears in the first line of the .csv files.

NOTE If the number of random samples is large, plotting randomized doping profiles can occupy a large amount of memory.

# Trap Concentration Variations

For the sIFM, variations of the random trap concentration are activated with the keyword TrapConcentration:

```typescript
Physics {
    RandomizedVariation <string> (
        TrapConcentration (
            SpatialShape = Uniform | Gaussian
                SpaceMid = <vector>
                    SpaceSig = <vector>
            )
        )
    )
}
```

All trap levels are randomized independently, assuming traps are spatially uncorrelated. The same expression as for doping concentration, Eq. 755, p. 708, is used. For the options of TrapConcentration, see Options Common to sIFM Variations on page 704.

The sIFM accounts for the impact of the trap concentration on the space charge in the Poisson equation and on the trap-related generation-recombination rates in the continuity equations.

# Workfunction Variations

For the sIFM, workfunction variations are activated and controlled using the Workfunction keyword:

```haskell
Physics {
RandomizedVariation <string> (Workfunction <string> (
    Surface = <string>
    CorrelationFunction = Grain | Exponential | Gaussian
    AverageGrainSize = <vector>
    Lambda = <vector>
    Resolution = <vector>
    MaxInternalPoints = <int>
    GrainProbability = (<float)...)
    GrainWorkfunction = (<float)...) * in eV
    Amplitude = <float>
    SpatialShape = Uniform | Gaussian
    SpaceMid = <vector>
    SpaceSig = <vector>
)
```

Surface specifies the name of a surface that consists of contacts on insulators and metal-insulator interfaces only. The specification of surfaces is described in Random Geometric Fluctuations on page 696. The workfunction is randomized for interfaces and contacts that are part of the given Surface.

GrainWorkfunction is a list of workfunction values (in eV) that can occur for a metal grain. GrainProbability is a list that gives the probabilities with which these workfunctions occur. These two parameters are used for Grain correlations. Amplitude (in eV) is a multiplier to the dimensionless field  $g(\vec{r})$  that is used for Gaussian and exponential correlations. For details, see Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705.

As the sIFM models the effect of deviations, the values of GrainWorkfunction are adjusted to have an average that agrees with the nominal workfunction specified for the electrode or metal. Therefore, adding the same value to all GrainWorkfunction values will not affect the results.

For the other options of Workfunction, see Options Common to sIFM Variations on page 704 and Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705.

The sIFM accounts for the impact of the workfunction on the boundary condition for the electrostatic potential at metal-insulator interfaces and at contacts on insulators.

# Geometric Variations

For the sIFM, geometric variations are activated and controlled using the Geometric keyword:

```txt
Physics {
RandomizedVariation <string> (Geometric <string> (
    Surface = <string>
    CorrelationFunction = Grain | Exponential | Gaussian
    AverageGrainSize = <vector>
    Lambda = <vector>
    Resolution = <vector>
    MaxInternalPoints = <int>
    Amplitude = <vector>
        * in micrometer
    Amplitude_Iso = <float>
        * in micrometer
    SpatialShape = Uniform | Gaussian
    SpaceMid = <vector>
    SpaceSig = <vector>
        Options = <0..1>
    WeightQuantumPotential = <float>
    WeightDielectric = <float>
)
```

Surface specifies the name of a surface that consists of electrodes on insulator, metal-insulator, semiconductor-insulator, and insulator-insulator interfaces only. The specification of surfaces is described in Random Geometric Fluctuations on page 696. The interface position is randomized for interfaces that are part of the given Surface.

For Grain correlations, for each grain, a random number  $g$  is selected from a Gaussian distribution of average zero and variance one. For each surface point that is contained in the grain, the interface shift along the normal direction  $\hat{n}$  is given by  $g\hat{n} \cdot (a_{\mathrm{iso}} + \vec{a} \cdot \hat{n})$ . Here,  $a_{\mathrm{iso}}$

and  $\vec{a}$  are the values specified (in  $\mu$ m) by Amplitude_Iso and Amplitude. For Gaussian and exponential variation, the field  $g(\hat{r})$  of dimensionless correlated random numbers determines the interface shift along the normal direction  $\hat{n}$  in a point  $\hat{r}$  on the surface as  $g(\hat{r})\hat{n} \cdot (a_{\mathrm{iso}} + \hat{a} \cdot \hat{n})$ . As above,  $a_{\mathrm{iso}}$  and  $\vec{a}$  are the values specified by Amplitude_Iso and Amplitude. For more details, see Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705.

The keywords Options, WeightQuantumPotential, and WeightDielectric work as explained in Random Geometric Fluctuations on page 696.

For the other options of Geometric, see Options Common to sIFM Variations on page 704 and Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705.

# Band Edge Variations

For the sIFM, band edge variations are activated and controlled using the BandEdge keyword:

```haskell
Physics {
RandomizedVariation <string> (BandEdge <string>
Volume = <string> * required
CorrelationFunction = Grain | Exponential | Gaussian
AverageGrainSize = <vector>
Lambda = <vector>
Resolution = <vector>
MaxInternalPoints = <int>
ChiComponent = <0..1> * default 0, RandomField component to use
EgComponent = <0..1> * default 1, RandomField component to use
GrainProbability = (<float>...) * dimensionless, nonnegative
GrainChi = (<float>...) * eV, same size as GrainProbability
GrainEg = (<float>...)
* than GrainProbability
Chi2Eg = <float> * dimensionless, default 0
Amplitude_Chi = <float> * eV
Amplitude_Eg = <float> * eV
SpatialShape = Uniform | Gaussian
SpaceMid = <vector>
SpaceSig = <vector>
)
```

Volume specifies a named volume that determines where band edge variations are active. For the specification of named volumes, see Random Band Edge Fluctuations on page 700.

For Grain correlations, GrainProbability is a list that gives the probabilities with which these shifts occur. GrainChi is a list of affinity shifts  $\delta \chi$  (in eV) with the same number of values as GrainProbability. Bandgap variations are computed as  $\delta E_{\mathrm{g,tot}} = \alpha \delta \chi + \delta E_{\mathrm{g}}$ , where  $\alpha$  is given by the Chi2Eg keyword, and  $\delta E_{\mathrm{g}}$  are values selected (statistically independently from the  $\delta \chi$ , but using the same GrainProbability list) from the list GrainEg (in eV). GrainEg has, at most, as many values as GrainProbability. Missing values is GrainEg are assumed to be zero.

The values in GrainChi and GrainEg automatically adjust to have zero average. Therefore, adding a constant to all components of these lists has no effect.

For exponential and Gaussian correlations,  $\delta \chi$  and  $\delta E_{\mathrm{g}}$  are obtained by multiplying Amplitude_Chi and Amplitude_Eg (in eV) by the zero-th and first component of the dimensionless field  $g(\dot{r})$  that is used for Gaussian and exponential correlations.

For all correlations, if RandomField is used, ChiComponent and EgComponent allow you to specify the component of the random field used to determine  $\delta \chi$  and  $\delta E_{\mathrm{g}}$ .

For details about correlations, see Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705. For the other remaining options, see Options Common to sIFM Variations on page 704.

# Metal Conductivity Variations

For the sIFM, metal conductivity variations are activated and controlled using the Conductivity keyword:

```haskell
Physics {
RandomizedVariation <string> (
Conductivity <string>
Volume = <string>
CorrelationFunction = Grain | Exponential | Gaussian
AverageGrainSize = <vector>
Lambda = <vector>
Resolution = <vector>
MaxInternalPoints = <int>
GrainProbability = (<float>...)
* dimensionless, nonnegative
GrainConductivity = (<float>...)
* A/cmV, size as GrainProbability
Amplitude = <float>
* A/cmV
SpatialShape = Uniform | Gaussian
SpaceMid = <vector>
SpaceSig = <vector>
)
```

Volume specifies a named volume that determines where metal conductivity variations are active. For the specification of named volumes, see Random Band Edge Fluctuations on page 700.

For Grain correlations, GrainProbability is a list that gives the probabilities with which these shifts occur. GrainConductivity is a list of a conductivity shifts (in A/cmV) with the same number of values as GrainProbability. The values in GrainConductivity are adjusted to have zero average. Therefore, adding a constant to all components of this list has no effect.

Amplitude (in  $\mathrm{A} / \mathrm{cmV}$ ) is a multiplier to the dimensionless field  $g(\hat{r})$  that is used for Gaussian and exponential correlations.

For details about correlations, see Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705. For the other remaining options, see Options Common to sIFM Variations on page 704.

# Dielectric Constant Variations

For the sIFM, relative dielectric constant variations are activated and controlled using the Epsilon keyword:

```txt
Physics {
RandomizedVariation <string> (Epsilon <string>
Volume = <string> * required
CorrelationFunction = Grain | Exponential | Gaussian
AverageGrainSize = <vector>
Lambda = <vector>
Resolution = <vector>
MaxInternalPoints = <int>
GrainProbability = (<float>...) * dimensionless, nonnegative
GrainEpsilon = (<float>...) * dimensionless, size as GrainProbability
Amplitude = <float> * dimensionless
SpatialShape = Uniform | Gaussian
SpaceMid = <vector>
SpaceSig = <vector>
}
```

Volume specifies a named volume that determines where relative dielectric constant variations are active. For the specification of named volumes, see Random Band Edge Fluctuations on page 700.

For Grain correlations, GrainProbability is a list that gives the probabilities with which these shifts occur. GrainEpsilon is a list of a relative dielectric constant shifts with the same number of values as GrainProbability. The values in GrainEpsilon are adjusted to have zero average. Therefore, adding a constant to all components of this list has no effect.

Amplitude (dimensionless) is a multiplier to the dimensionless field  $g(\vec{r})$  that is used for Gaussian and exponential correlations.

For details about correlations, see Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705. For the other remaining options, see Options Common to sIFM Variations on page 704.

# Doping Profile Variations

Doping profile variations are activated and controlled using the DopingVariation keyword:

```txt
Physics {
RandomizedVariation <string> (
DopingVariation <string>
CorrelationFunction = Grain | Exponential | Gaussian
AverageGrainSize = <vector>
Lambda = <vector>
Resolution = <vector>
MaxInternalPoints = <int>
SFactor = <string>
Amplitude = <vector>
Amplitude_Iso = <float>
Conc = <float>
Type = Doping | Acceptor | Donor
SpatialShape = Uniform | Gaussian
SpaceMid = <vector>
SpaceSig = <vector>
-Mobility
-BandgapNarrowing
)
```

The options SFactor, Conc, Type, Amplitude, and Amplitude_Iso are used to describe a doping profile shift based on the gradient of a dataset, as described in Deterministic Doping Variations on page 715. In addition to what is described there, for sIFM, the shift is multiplied by a spatially correlated, dimensionless, random field.

For grain correlations, the random number in each grain is Gaussian distributed, with zero average and variance of one. For exponential and Gaussian correlations, the dimensionless random field is the one obtained from the Fourier approach.

By default, the impact of doping concentration on space charge, mobility, and bandgap narrowing is accounted for. The options -Mobility and -BandgapNarrowing disable the impact due to mobility and bandgap narrowing, respectively.

NOTE It is strongly advisable to use either both the -BandgapNarrowing and -Mobility options or neither option. Otherwise, inconsistencies can arise when the mobility depends indirectly on bandgap narrowing. Even when this dependency is weak, the inconsistency can lead to large errors in IFM results.

For the other options of DopingVariation, see Options Common to sIFM Variations on page 704 and Spatial Correlations and Random Fields on page 705.

# Deterministic Variations

For deterministic variations, you specify the variations directly, by specifying the actual deviation in doping, geometry, or model parameters. Sentaurus Device computes the effect of the variations on the observation node voltages and currents in a linear response. As for random fluctuations, deterministic variations are assumed to be different from zero only for analysis frequencies up to  $0.5\mathrm{Hz}$ .

Compared to random fluctuations, deterministic variations give you more control over the variation and are easier to understand, because no statistical interpretation is required and no second-order moments appear. In the case of geometric variations, the computational effort is smaller as well.

# Deterministic Doping Variations

Deterministic doping variations are specified as an option to DeterministicVariation in the Physics section:

```txt
Physics {
DeterministicVariation(
DopingVariation <name> (
    SFactor = <string>
    Amplitude = <vector>
    Amplitude_Iso = <float>
    Amplitude_Abs = <float>
    Conc = <float>
    Factor = <float>
    Type = Doping | Acceptor | Donor
SpatialShape = Gaussian | Uniform
SpaceMid = <vector>
```

# 23: Noise, Fluctuations, and Sensitivity

# Deterministic Variations

```txt
SpaceSig  $=$  <vector> -Mobility -BandgapNarrowing ）... ）…
```

Here, <name> is a string that names the variation and will be used to identify output to the ACExtract file. If it coincides with the name of a geometric or a parameter variation, the contributions of the variations are added.

SFactor specifies a scalar dataset. Allowed datasets are doping concentrations and PMIUserFields. If you do not specify any dataset, a constant density of  $1\mathrm{cm}^{-3}$  is assumed.

By specifying Conc, the concentration is normalized and then multiplied by the concentration specified with Conc. Conc is given in  $\mathrm{cm}^{-3}$ . If Conc is not specified or is zero, the values from the dataset will be used unaltered.

If the SFactor dataset is a PMIUserField dataset or another dataset that is not a density, Sentaurus Device cannot properly determine the units of the dataset and, therefore, it interprets its value with a different scaling constant to the one you intended. Specifying Conc can be useful in this case, as the normalization of the SFactor eliminates the ambiguous units.

By default, the resulting concentration  $X$  determines the fluctuation  $\delta N$  directly,  $\delta N = X$ . If you use Amplitude_Iso, Amplitude, or Amplitude_Abs to specify nonzero isotropic or vectorial amplitudes  $a_{\mathrm{iso}}$ ,  $\vec{a}$ , and  $\vec{a}_{\mathrm{abs}}$ , the fluctuation is computed from  $X$  as  $\delta N = -\vec{a} \cdot \nabla X - a_{\mathrm{iso}} |\nabla X| - \vec{a}_{\mathrm{abs}} \cdot \mathrm{abs}(\nabla X)$ , where  $\mathrm{abs}(\nabla X)$  is the vector obtained by taking the absolute value of  $\nabla X$  component-wise. The vectorial amplitude models the small displacement of a profile, and the isotropic amplitude models a shift of a doping front (perpendicular to the equi-doping lines). For this to work properly, the mesh must accurately resolve the variations of  $X$ . Both amplitudes are specified in  $\mu \mathrm{m}$ .

Optionally, a dimensionless value Factor can be specified, which is multiplied by the resulting  $\delta N$ . The factor defaults to one. Its purpose is to easily specify variations that are a certain percentage of a given doping data field.

Using the keywords SpatialShape, SpaceMid, and SpaceSig, you can multiply  $\delta N$  by either a Gaussian function or a window function. These keywords work in the same way as for traps (see Energetic and Spatial Distribution of Traps on page 458). The shape functions must adequately be resolved by the mesh.

Type selects whether the variation applies to the acceptor concentration ( $\delta N_{\mathrm{A}} = \delta N$ ), the donor concentration ( $\delta N_{\mathrm{D}} = \delta N$ ), or doping as a whole. In the latter case, a negative variation increases the acceptor concentration; a positive variation increases donor concentration.

By default, the impact of doping concentration on space charge, mobility, and bandgap narrowing is accounted for. The options -Mobility and -BandgapNarrowing disable the impact due to mobility and bandgap narrowing, respectively.

NOTE It is strongly advisable to use either both the -BandgapNarrowing and -Mobility options or neither option. Otherwise, inconsistencies can arise when the mobility depends indirectly on bandgap narrowing. Even when this dependency is weak, the inconsistency can lead to large errors in IFM results.

For a summary of options to DopingVariation, see Table 282 on page 1456.

# Deterministic Geometric Variations

Deterministic geometric variations are specified as an option to DeterministicVariation in the Physics section:

```txt
Physics {
DeterministicVariation(
    GeometricVariation <name> (
        Surface = <string>
        Amplitude = <vector>
        Amplitude_Iso = <float>
        SpatialShape = Gaussian
        SpaceMid = <vector>
        SpaceSig = <vector>
        Options = <0..1>
        WeightQuantumPotential = <float>
        WeightDielectric = <float>
    ) ...
}
```

Here, <name> is a string that names the variation and will be used to identify output to the ACExtract file. If it coincides with the name of a doping or a parameter variation, the contributions of the variations are added.

Surface identifies the displaced interfaces. Its specification is described in Random Geometric Fluctuations on page 696. The amount of displacement along the positive normal in a point  $\vec{r}$  on the surface is determined by Amplitude_Iso  $(a_{\mathrm{iso}})$  and Amplitude  $(a)$ , both specified in  $\mu \mathrm{m}$ , as  $\delta s(\vec{r}) = a_{\mathrm{iso}}(\vec{r}) + \vec{a}(\vec{r}) \cdot \hat{n}(\vec{r})$ .

Using the keywords SpatialShape, SpaceMid, and SpaceSig, you can multiply  $\delta s$  by a Gaussian function.

These keywords work in the same way as for traps (see Energetic and Spatial Distribution of Traps on page 458). The Gaussian must be resolved adequately by the mesh.

The keywords Options, WeightQuantumPotential, and WeightDielectric work as explained in Random Geometric Fluctuations on page 696.

For a summary of options of GeometricVariation, see Table 296 on page 1462.

# Parameter Variations

Sentaurus Device allows to compute the linear response to the variation of any parameter that can be ramped. The parameter variations are specified as an option to DeterministicVariation in the Physics section:

```txt
Physics {
DeterministicVariation (
ParameterVariation <name> (
Material = <string>
Region = <string>
MaterialInterface = <string>
RegionInterface = <string>
Model = <string>
Parameter = <string>
Value = <float>
Factor = <float>
Summand = <float>
) ...
) ...
) ...
}
```

Here, <name> is a string that names the variation and is used to identify output to the ACEExtract file. If it coincides with the name of a doping or a geometry variation, the contributions of the variations are added.

The option of ParameterVariation is a list of an arbitrary number of individual parameter specifications, each of which is enclosed by a pair of parentheses. All these variations are performed together to compute their cumulative impact.

Material, Region, MaterialInterface, or RegionInterface specify the location of the parameter that is varied. At most, one of these keywords must be specified. Model specifies the name of the model to which the varied parameter belongs, and Parameter is the name of the parameter within this model. All these keywords specify a parameter in the same way as for parameter ramping (see Ramping Physical Parameter Values on page 78).

To specify the correct location for a parameter can be complicated. Combining Parameter Specifications on page 30 explains how the specifications in the parameter file determine the location from which the parameters used in the computation are taken.

Each varied parameter has an original value  $\gamma$  (the default value, or the value that was set in the parameter file). The modified value  $\gamma'$  can be given by one of two ways:

- Directly by specification of the modified value using Value = Y'  
By using the keywords Factor and Summand:  $\gamma' = \text{Factor} \cdot \gamma + \text{Summand}$

Sentaurus Device assembles the right-hand side twice: once with the original parameters, and once with the modified parameters. Then, the difference in the right-hand sides is used to compute the variation of output characteristics in the linear response. However, as the right-hand sides are not linear in the parameters, the method is not perfectly linear, which becomes visible if the parameter variation  $\gamma' - \gamma$  is not small. On the other hand, if the parameter variation becomes too small, numeric noise can obscure the results.

# IFM Section

Instead of defining the noise and variation models in the Math and Physics sections, you can also define all these models in the IFM section as follows:

```txt
IFM{ Noise（ ... ) RandomizedVariation( ... ) DeterministicVariation( ... ）
```

Parameters of the Noise model can be defined in the IFM section as well:

```txt
IFM{ Noise ( MonopolarGRNoise ( e_alpha  $= 1\dots$  ）... ）...   
}
```

Table 130 lists all the Noise model parameters.  
Table 130 Noise model parameters  

<table><tr><td>Model</td><td>Symbol</td><td>Default value</td><td>Unit</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">MonopolarGRNoise</td><td>e_alpha</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>h_alpha</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>e_tau</td><td>1e-7</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>h_tau</td><td>1e-7</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">FlickerGRNoise</td><td>e_alpha_H</td><td>2e-3</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>h_alpha_H</td><td>2e-3</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>e_tau0</td><td>1e-6</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>h_tau0</td><td>1e-6</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>e_tau1</td><td>3e-4</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td>h_tau1</td><td>3e-4</td><td>s</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">GeometricFluctuations</td><td>lambda</td><td>0</td><td>μm</td></tr><tr><td>Amplitude_Iso</td><td>-3e303</td><td>μm</td></tr><tr><td>Amplitude</td><td>(-3e303,-3e303,-3e303)</td><td>μm</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">WorkfunctionFluctuations</td><td>lambda</td><td>0</td><td>μm</td></tr><tr><td>Amplitude</td><td>-1</td><td>eV</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">BandEdgeFluctuations</td><td>lambda</td><td>0</td><td>μm</td></tr><tr><td>Amplitude_chi</td><td>0</td><td>eV</td></tr><tr><td>Amplitude_Eg</td><td>0</td><td>eV</td></tr><tr><td>Chi2Eg</td><td>0</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">ConductivityFluctuations</td><td>lambda</td><td>0</td><td>μm</td></tr><tr><td>Amplitude</td><td>-1</td><td>A cm-1V-1</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">EpsilonFluctuations</td><td>lambda</td><td>0</td><td>μm</td></tr><tr><td>Amplitude</td><td>-1</td><td>1</td></tr></table>

# Impedance Field Method

The impedance field method splits noise and fluctuation analysis into two tasks. The first task is to provide models for local microscopic fluctuations inside the devices. The selection of the appropriate models depends on the problem. You have to select the models according to the kind of fluctuation that interests you. The second task is to determine the impact of the local fluctuations on the terminal characteristics. To solve this task, the response of the contact voltage or contact current to local fluctuation is assumed to be linear. For each contact, Green's functions are computed that describe this linear relationship. In contrast to the first task, the second task is purely numeric, as the Green's functions are completely specified by the transport model.

A Green's function describes the response  $G_{\xi}(\boldsymbol{x}, \omega)$  of the current or voltage at node  $c$  due to a perturbation of quantity  $\xi$  at location  $x$  with angular frequency  $\omega$ . Particularly important is the case where  $\xi$  is the right-hand side of the partial differential equation for a solution variable  $\phi$  (see Eq. 37, p. 175),  $n$  or  $p$  (see Eq. 53, p. 183),  $T_{n}$  (see Eq. 73, p. 197),  $T_{p}$  (see Eq. 74, p. 198), or  $T$ .

Given the Green's function and a variation  $\delta \xi$  of the quantity  $\xi$ , Sentaurus Device can compute the current response at node  $c$  as:

$$
\delta I _ {c} = \int G _ {\xi} ^ {c} (x, \omega) \delta \xi (x, \omega) d x \tag {756}
$$

Here, the integral runs over the entire device. For the sIFM (see Statistical Impedance Field Method on page 703),  $\delta \xi$  is obtained by the randomization procedure specific to the type of variation and, for deterministic variations (see Deterministic Variations on page 715),  $\delta \xi$  is given by users.

For noise (and noise-like descriptions of static variations; see Noise Sources on page 692), it is assumed that the expectation value  $\langle \delta \xi \rangle$  of  $\delta \xi$  vanishes, and the second-order statistic moment, the so-called noise source, is considered:

$$
K (x, x ^ {\prime}, \omega) = \langle \delta \xi (x, \omega) \cdot \delta \xi^ {*} (x ^ {\prime}, \omega) \rangle \tag {757}
$$

From the noise source, the noise current spectral densities (or in the static case, the variances and covariances) are obtained as:

$$
S _ {I} ^ {c _ {1}, c _ {2}} = \iint G _ {\xi} ^ {c _ {1}} (x, \omega) K \left(x, x ^ {\prime}, \omega\right) G _ {\xi} ^ {c _ {2} *} \left(x ^ {\prime}, \omega\right) d x d x ^ {\prime} \tag {758}
$$

Similar relations are used for the noise voltage spectral densities  $S_V$ .

Some of the noise sources are local,  $K(x,x^{\prime},\omega) = \delta (x - x^{\prime})K(x,\omega)$ , which allows you to reduce the number of integrations in Eq. 758 to one.  $K(x,\omega)$  is called the local noise source

(LNS), and the integrand of Eq. 758 in this case is called the local noise current spectral density (LNISD), and the corresponding integrand for  $S_V$  is called the local noise voltage spectral density (LNVSD).

# Noise Output Data

Several variables can be plotted during noise analysis. For each device, a NoisePlot section can be specified similar to the Plot section, where the data to be plotted is listed. Besides the standard data, additional noise-specific data or groups of data can be specified, as listed in Table 131. In the tables, the abbreviations LNS (local noise source) and LNVSD (local noise voltage spectral density) are used.

Autocorrelation data refers to Eq. 758 when  $c_{1} = c_{2}$ . Data selected in the NoisePlot section is plotted for each device and observation node at a given frequency into a separate file. File names with the following format are used:

```txt
<noise-plot>_.<device-name>_.<ob-node>_.<number>_.acgf_des.tdr
```

where  $<\text{noise-plot}>$  is the prefix specified by the NoisePlot option to ACCoupled.

NOTE Only the noise data specified in a Noise section without a name, or with an empty string as a name, will be plotted.

In the case of  $c_{1} \neq c_{2}$  in Eq. 758, node cross-correlation spectra are computed and integrands become complex. Data specified in the NoisePlot section is plotted for each device and each pair of observation nodes at a given frequency into a separate file.

The file names have the format:

```xml
<noise-plot>_.<device-name>_.<ob-node-1>_.<ob-node-2>_.<number>_.acgf_des.tdr
```

Table 131 Device noise data  

<table><tr><td>Keyword</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>eeDiffusionLNS</td><td>Electron diffusion LNS</td></tr><tr><td>hhDiffusionLNS</td><td>Hole diffusion LNS</td></tr><tr><td>eeMonopolarGRLNS</td><td>Trace of electron monopolar GR LNS</td></tr><tr><td>hhMonopolarGRLNS</td><td>Trace of hole monopolar GR LNS</td></tr><tr><td>eeFlickerGRLNS</td><td>Trace of electron flicker GR LNS</td></tr><tr><td>hhFlickerGRLNS</td><td>Trace of hole flicker GR LNS</td></tr></table>

Table 131 Device noise data (Continued)  

<table><tr><td>Keyword</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>ReLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of LNVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ImLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ReLNISD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of local noise current spectral density</td></tr><tr><td>ImLNISD</td></tr><tr><td>ReeeLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of LNVSD for electrons</td></tr><tr><td>ImeeLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>RehhLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of LNVSD for holes</td></tr><tr><td>ImhhLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ReeeDiffusionLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of diffusion LNVSD for electrons</td></tr><tr><td>ImeeDiffusionLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>RehhDiffusionLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of diffusion LNVSD for holes</td></tr><tr><td>ImhhDiffusionLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ReeeMonopolarGRLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of electron monopolar LNVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ImeeMonopolarGRLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>RehhMonopolarGRLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of hole monopolar LNVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ImhhMonopolarGRLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ReeeFlickerGRLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of electron flicker GR LNVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ImeeFlickerGRLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>RehhFlickerGRLNVXVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of hole flicker GR LNVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ImhhFlickerGRLNVXVSD</td></tr><tr><td>ReTrapLNISD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of local trapping noise current spectral density</td></tr><tr><td>ImTrapLNISD</td></tr><tr><td>ReTrapLVSD</td><td rowspan="2">Real/imaginary parts of local trapping noise voltage spectral density</td></tr><tr><td>ImTrapLVSD</td></tr><tr><td>PoECReACGreenFunction</td><td rowspan="4">Real/imaginary parts of Gn</td></tr><tr><td>PoECImACGreenFunction</td></tr><tr><td>CurECReACGreenFunction</td></tr><tr><td>CurECImACGreenFunction</td></tr><tr><td>PoHCReACGreenFunction</td><td rowspan="4">Real/imaginary parts of Gp</td></tr><tr><td>PoHCIImACGreenFunction</td></tr><tr><td>CurHCReACGreenFunction</td></tr><tr><td>CurHCIImACGreenFunction</td></tr><tr><td>PoETReACGreenFunction</td><td rowspan="4">Real/imaginary parts of GTn</td></tr><tr><td>PoETImACGreenFunction</td></tr><tr><td>CurETReACGreenFunction</td></tr><tr><td>CurETImACGreenFunction</td></tr></table>

# 23: Noise, Fluctuations, and Sensitivity

Noise Output Data

Table 131 Device noise data (Continued)  

<table><tr><td>Keyword</td><td>Description</td></tr><tr><td>PoHTReACGreenFunction</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of GTp</td></tr><tr><td>PoHTImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CurHTReACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CurHTImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>PoLTReACGreenFunction</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of GT</td></tr><tr><td>PoLTImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CurLTReACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CurLTImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>PoPotReACGreenFunction</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of Gφ</td></tr><tr><td>PoPotImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CurPotReACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>CurPotImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>PoGeoGreenFunction</td><td>Real part of the Green&#x27;s functions for geometric variations</td></tr><tr><td>CurGeoGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>GradPoECReACGreenFunction</td><td>Real/imaginary parts of ∇·Gn, ∇·Gp, ∇·GTn, ∇·Gtp for voltage noise</td></tr><tr><td>GradPoECImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>GradPoHCReACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>GradPoHCIImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>GradPoETReACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>GradPoETImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>GradPoHTReACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>GradPoHTImACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Grad2PoECACGreenFunction</td><td>|Gn|2 and |Gp|2 for voltage noise</td></tr><tr><td>Grad2PoHCACGreenFunction</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>AllLNS</td><td>All used LNS</td></tr><tr><td>AllLNVXVSD</td><td>All used LNVSD</td></tr><tr><td>GreenFunctions</td><td>Green&#x27;s functions and their gradients</td></tr></table>

# References

[1] F. Bonani et al., "An Efficient Approach to Noise Analysis Through Multidimensional Physics-Based Models," IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 261-269, 1998.  
[2] J.-P. Nougier, “Fluctuations and Noise of Hot Carriers in Semiconductor Materials and Devices,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 2034–2049, 1994.  
[3] F. Bonani and G. Ghione, "Generation-recombination noise modelling in semiconductor devices through population or approximate equivalent current density fluctuations," Solid-State Electronics, vol. 43, no 2, pp. 285-295, 1999.