This chapter describes carrier transport boundary conditions for heterointerfaces.

# Thermionic Emission Current

Conventional transport equations cease to be valid at a heterojunction interface, and currents and energy fluxes at the abrupt interface between two materials are better defined by the interface condition at the heterojunction. In defining thermionic current and thermionic energy flux, Sentaurus Device follows the literature [1].

# Using Thermionic Emission Current

To activate the thermionic current model for electrons at a region-interface (material-interface) heterojunction, the keyword eThermionic must be specified in the appropriate region-interface (material-interface) Physics section, for example:

```txt
Physics(MaterialInterface  $=$  "GaAs/AlGaAs") { eThermionic }
```

Similarly, to activate thermionic current for holes, the keyword hThermionic must be specified. The keyword Thermionic activates the thermionic emission model for both electrons and holes. If any of these keywords is specified in the Physics section for a region Region.0, where Region.0 is a semiconductor, the appropriate model will be applied to each Region.0-semiconductor interface.

For small particle and energy fluxes across the interface, the condition of continuous quasi-Fermi level and carrier temperature is sometimes used. This option is activated by the keyword Heterointerface in the appropriate Physics section. In realistic transistors, such an approach might lead to unsatisfactory results [2].

You can change the coefficients of the thermionic emission model in the ThermionicEmission parameter set in an interface-specific section in the parameter file:

```txt
RegionInterface  $=$  "regionA/regionB" { ThermionicEmission { A  $= 2$  ，2 # [1] B  $= 4$  ，4 # [1]
```

$$
\left. \begin{array}{l} C = 1, 1 \quad \# [ 1 ] \\ \} \\ \} \end{array} \right\}
$$

# Thermionic Emission Model

Assume that at the heterointerface between materials 1 and 2, the conduction edge jump is positive, that is  $\Delta E_{\mathrm{C}} > 0$ , where  $\Delta E_{\mathrm{C}} = E_{\mathrm{C},2} - E_{\mathrm{C},1}$  (that is,  $\chi_{1} > \chi_{2}$ ). If  $J_{n,2}$  and  $S_{n,2}$  are the electron current density and electron energy flux density entering material 2, and  $J_{n,1}$  and  $S_{n,1}$  are the electron current density and electron energy flux density leaving material 1, the interface condition can be written as:

$$
J _ {n, 2} = J _ {n, 1} \tag {836}
$$

$$
J _ {n, 2} = a _ {n} q \left[ v _ {n, 2} n _ {2} - \frac {m _ {n , 2}}{m _ {n , 1}} v _ {n, 1} n _ {1} \exp \left(- \frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {C}}}{k T _ {n , 1}}\right) \right] \tag {837}
$$

$$
S _ {n, 2} = S _ {n, 1} + \frac {c _ {n}}{q} J _ {n, 2} \Delta E _ {\mathrm {C}} \tag {838}
$$

$$
S _ {n, 2} = - b _ {n} \left[ v _ {n, 2} n _ {2} k T _ {n, 2} - \frac {m _ {n , 2}}{m _ {n , 1}} v _ {n, 1} n _ {1} k T _ {n, 1} \exp \left(- \frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {C}}}{k T _ {n , 1}}\right) \right] \tag {839}
$$

where the 'emission velocities' are defined as:

$$
v _ {n, i} = \sqrt {\frac {k T _ {n , i}}{2 \pi m _ {n , i}}} \tag {840}
$$

and by default, the coefficients in the above equations are  $a_{n} = 2$ ,  $b_{n} = 4$ , and  $c_{n} = 1$ , which corresponds to the literature [1]. Similar equations for the hole thermionic current and hole thermionic energy flux are presented below:

$$
J _ {p, 2} = J _ {p, 1} \tag {841}
$$

$$
J _ {p, 2} = - a _ {p} q \left[ v _ {p, 2} p _ {2} - \frac {m _ {p , 2}}{m _ {p , 1}} v _ {p, 1} p _ {1} \exp \left(\frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {V}}}{k T _ {p , 1}}\right) \right] \tag {842}
$$

$$
S _ {p, 2} = S _ {p, 1} + \frac {c _ {p}}{q} J _ {p, 2} \Delta E _ {\mathrm {V}} \tag {843}
$$

$$
S _ {p, 2} = - b _ {p} \left[ v _ {p, 2} p _ {2} k T _ {p, 2} - \frac {m _ {p , 2}}{m _ {p , 1}} v _ {p, 1} n _ {1} k T _ {p, 1} \exp \left(\frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {V}}}{k T _ {p , 1}}\right) \right] \tag {844}
$$

$$
v _ {p, i} = \sqrt {\frac {k T _ {p , i}}{2 \pi m _ {p , i}}} \tag {845}
$$

An equivalent set of equations are used if Fermi carrier statistics is selected.

# Thermionic Emission Model With Fermi Statistics

With Fermi statistics, the electron current density and the electron energy flux density are:

$$
J _ {n, 2} = a _ {n} q \left(v _ {n, 2} N _ {C, 2} \zeta_ {n, 2} - \frac {m _ {n , 2}}{m _ {n , 1}} v _ {n, 1} N _ {C, 1} \zeta_ {n, 1}\right) \tag {846}
$$

$$
S _ {n, 2} = - b _ {n} \left(v _ {n, 2} k T _ {n, 2} N _ {C, 2} \zeta_ {n, 2} - \frac {m _ {n , 2}}{m _ {n , 1}} v _ {n, 1} k T _ {n, 1} N _ {C, 1} \zeta_ {n, 1}\right) \tag {847}
$$

$$
\zeta_ {n, 2} = \ln [ 1 + \exp (- \eta_ {n, 2}) ] + \eta_ {n, 2} \tag {848}
$$

$$
\zeta_ {n, 1} = \ln \left[ 1 + \exp \left(- \eta_ {n, 1} ^ {\prime}\right) \right] + \eta_ {n, 1} ^ {\prime} \tag {849}
$$

$$
\eta_ {n, 1} ^ {\prime} = \eta_ {n, 1} - \frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {C}}}{k T _ {n , 1}} \tag {850}
$$

Here,  $\mathfrak{n}_n$  is given in Eq. 49, p. 179 and  $N_{\mathrm{C}}$  is given in Eq. 182, p. 264. Similar equations apply to holes:

$$
J _ {p, 2} = - a _ {p} q \left(v _ {p, 2} N _ {V, 2} \zeta_ {p, 2} - \frac {m _ {p , 2}}{m _ {p , 1}} v _ {p, 1} N _ {V, 1} \zeta_ {p, 1}\right) \tag {851}
$$

$$
S _ {p, 2} = - b _ {p} \left(v _ {p, 2} k T _ {p, 2} N _ {V, 2} \zeta_ {p, 2} - \frac {m _ {p , 2}}{m _ {p , 1}} v _ {p, 1} k T _ {p, 1} N _ {V, 1} \zeta_ {p, 1}\right) \tag {852}
$$

$$
\zeta_ {p, 2} = \ln [ 1 + \exp (- \eta_ {p, 2}) ] + \eta_ {p, 2} \tag {853}
$$

$$
\zeta_ {p, 1} = \ln \left[ 1 + \exp \left(- \eta_ {p, 1} ^ {\prime}\right) \right] + \eta_ {p, 1} ^ {\prime} \tag {854}
$$

$$
\eta_ {p, 1} ^ {\prime} = \eta_ {p, 1} + \frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {V}}}{k T _ {p , 1}} \tag {855}
$$

Here,  $\mathfrak{n}_p$  is given in Eq. 50, p. 179 and  $N_{\mathrm{V}}$  is given in Eq. 186, p. 265.

If Fermi statistics is used, this model can be activated by specifying Formula  $= 1$  in the ThermionicEmission section of the parameter file:

```txt
ThermionicEmission { Formula  $= 1$  }
```

By default Formula  $= 0$ , it activates the old model, where the Boltzmann-like thermionic emission equations similar to Eq. 836-Eq. 845 are used. This can lead to incorrect results in high carrier density. In this case, a warning message will be given.

NOTE Always specify Formula  $= 1$  when Fermi statistics is used. This option will become the default in later versions of Sentaurus Device. If Fermi statistics is not used, Eq. 836-Eq. 845 will be activated regardless of the Formula statement in the parameter file.

# Gaussian Transport Across Organic Heterointerfaces

A thermionic-like current boundary condition has been introduced to correctly account for carrier transport across organic heterointerfaces. An organic heterointerface is defined in this context as an heterointerface with the Gaussian density-of-states (DOS) model (see Gaussian Density-of-States for Organic Semiconductors on page 266) activated in both regions that are adjacent to the heterointerface.

# Using Gaussian Transport at Organic Heterointerfaces

The model is activated by switching to the Gaussian DOS model in both regions of the heterointerface that are meant to be organic:

```javascript
Physics Region  $=$  "OrganicRegion_1") { EffectiveMass(GaussianDOS) } Physics (Region  $=$  "OrganicRegion_2") { EffectiveMass(GaussianDOS) }
```

and then specifying the keyword Organic_Gaussian as an option for the Thermionic model in the Physics section of the organic heterointerface:

```txt
Physics (RegionInterface="OrganicRegion_1/OrganicRegion_2") { Thermionic(Organic_Gaussian) }
```

This syntax also automatically switches on the double points at the organic heterointerface.

The parameters  $\nu_{n,\mathrm{org}}$  and  $\nu_{p,\mathrm{org}}$  in Eq. 857 and Eq. 859, p. 781 can be adjusted in the ThermionicEmission section of the parameter file (their default values are  $1\times 10^{6}\mathrm{cm / s}$ ):

```txt
RegionInterface  $=$  "OrganicRegion_1/OrganicRegion_2" { ThermionicEmission { vel org  $\equiv$  1e7,1e7 # [cm/s] }   
}
```

# Gaussian Transport at Organic Heterointerface Model

Assuming a positive conduction edge jump and a negative valence edge jump from material 1 to material 2, the boundary conditions at the organic heterointerface are given by:

$$
J _ {n, 2} = J _ {n, 1} \tag {856}
$$

$$
J _ {n, 2} = v _ {n, \text {o r g}} q \left(n _ {2} - n _ {1} \exp \left(- \frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {C}}}{k T _ {n , 1}}\right)\right) \tag {857}
$$

$$
J _ {p, 2} = J _ {p, 1} \tag {858}
$$

$$
J _ {p, 2} = v _ {p, \text {o r g}} q \left(p _ {2} - p _ {1} \exp \left(- \frac {\Delta E _ {\mathrm {V}}}{k T _ {p , 1}}\right)\right) \tag {859}
$$

# where:

-  $J_{n,2}$  and  $J_{n,1}$  are the electron current densities entering material 2 and leaving material 1, respectively.  
-  $J_{p,2}$  and  $J_{p,1}$  are the hole current densities leaving material 2 and entering material 1, respectively.  
-  $\Delta E_{\mathrm{C}} = d_{\mathrm{C},2} - d_{\mathrm{C},1}$  where  $d_{\mathrm{C},2}$  and  $d_{\mathrm{C},1}$  are the distances of the Gaussian distribution peaks to the conduction band edges.  
-  $\Delta E_{\mathrm{V}} = d_{\mathrm{V},2} - d_{\mathrm{V},1}$  where  $d_{\mathrm{V},2}$  and  $d_{\mathrm{V},1}$  are the distances of the Gaussian distribution peaks to the valence band edges.

# References

[1] D. Schroeder, Modelling of Interface Carrier Transport for Device Simulation, Wien: Springer, 1994.  
[2] K. Horio and H. Yanai, “Numerical Modeling of Heterojunctions Including the Thermionic Emission Mechanism at the Heterojunction Interface,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 1093–1098, 1990.